Exercise and Physical Activity for Older Adults : Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise
Advertisement
Ovid
®
Ovid Logo
Search Ovid
Search Ovid
Browse
Browse
Login
Login
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise
Search Journal
Search Journal
Button group.
Check Access
Permissions
Share
Cite
Favorite
SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS: Position Stand
Exercise and Physical Activity for Older Adults
Wojtek
J.
Chodzko-Zajko
David
N.
Proctor
Maria
A.
Fiatarone Singh
Christopher
T.
Minson
Claudio
R.
Nigg
George
J.
Salem
James
S.
Skinner
Authors and Affiliations
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise
41
(
7
)
:p
1510
-
1530
,
July 2009
.
|
DOI:
10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181a0c95c
Abstract
SUMMARY
The purpose of this Position Stand is to provide an overview of issues critical to understanding the importance of exercise and physical activity in older adult populations. The Position Stand is divided into three sections: Section 1 briefly reviews the structural and functional changes that characterize normal human aging, Section 2 considers the extent to which exercise and physical activity can influence the aging process, and Section 3 summarizes the benefits of both long-term exercise and physical activity and shorter-duration exercise programs on health and functional capacity. Although no amount of physical activity can stop the biological aging process, there is evidence that regular exercise can minimize the physiological effects of an otherwise sedentary lifestyle and increase active life expectancy by limiting the development and progression of chronic disease and disabling conditions. There is also emerging evidence for significant psychological and cognitive benefits accruing from regular exercise participation by older adults. Ideally, exercise prescription for older adults should include aerobic exercise, muscle strengthening exercises, and flexibility exercises. The evidence reviewed in this Position Stand is generally consistent with prior American College of Sports Medicine statements on the types and amounts of physical activity recommended for older adults as well as the recently published
2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans
. All older adults should engage in regular physical activity and avoid an inactive lifestyle.
Copyright ©2009The American College of Sports Medicine
Advertisement
Advertisement
Advertisement