
--- Page 1 ---
Dietary
Guidelines
For Americans
Protein, Dairy
 Vegetables
& Healthy Fats & Fruits
Whole
Grains
realfood.gov 2025–2030

--- Page 2 ---
Message from the Secretaries
Welcome to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030.
These Guidelines mark the most significant reset of federal nutrition policy in our nation’s history.
The message is simple: eat real food.
To Make America Healthy Again, we must return to the basics. American households must prioritize diets built on whole,
nutrient-dense foods—protein, dairy, vegetables, fruits, healthy fats,
and whole grains. Paired with a dramatic reduction in highly processed foods laden with refined carbohydrates, added sugars,
excess sodium, unhealthy fats, and chemical additives, this approach can change the health trajectory for so many Americans.
The United States is amid a health emergency. Nearly 90% of health care spending goes to treating people who
have chronic diseases.1 Many of these illnesses are not genetic destiny; they are the predictable result of the
Standard American Diet—a diet which, over time, has become reliant on highly processed foods and coupled with a sedentary
lifestyle.
The consequences have been devastating. More than 70% of American adults are overweight or obese.2 Nearly one in three
American adolescents between the ages of 12 and 17 has prediabetes.3 Diet-driven chronic disease now disqualifies large
numbers of young Americans from military service, undermining national readiness and cutting off a historic pathway to
opportunity and upward mobility.4
For decades, federal incentives have promoted low-quality, highly processed foods and pharmaceutical intervention instead
of prevention. This crisis is the result of poor policy choices; inadequate nutrition research; and a lack of coordination across
federal, state, local, and private partners.
This changes today.
We are realigning our food system to support American farmers, ranchers, and companies who grow and produce real food—
and the Trump administration is working to ensure all families can afford it.
We are putting real food back at the center of the American diet. Real food that nourishes the body. Real food that restores
health. Real food that fuels energy and encourages movement and exercise. Real food that builds strength.
Under President Trump’s leadership, we are restoring common sense, scientific integrity, and accountability to federal food
and health policy—and we are reclaiming the food pyramid and returning it to its true purpose of educating and nourishing all
Americans.
These Guidelines call on every American to eat more real food. They call on farmers, ranchers, health care professionals,
insurers, educators, community leaders, industry, and lawmakers across all levels of government to join in this
critical effort.
Together, we can shift our food system away from chronic disease and toward nutrient density, nourishment, resilience,
and long-term health.
America’s future depends on what we grow, what we serve, and what we choose to eat.
This is the foundation that will Make America Healthy Again.
Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. Brooke L. Rollins
Secretary, Secretary,
U.S. Department of Health and U.S. Department of Agriculture
Human Services
1 h ttps://www.cdc.gov/chronic-disease/data-research/facts-stats/index.html 3 h ttps://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/diabetes/diabetesatlas-spotlight.html
2 h ttps://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/obesity-overweight.htm 4 h ttps://www.cdc.gov/physical-activity/php/military-readiness/unfit-to-serve.html
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 1

--- Page 3 ---
Eat the Right Amount for You
+ The calories you need depend on your + Hydration is a key factor in overall health.
age, sex, height, weight, and level of Choose water (still or sparkling) and
physical activity. unsweetened beverages.
+ Pay attention to portion sizes, particularly
for foods and beverages higher in calories.
Prioritize Protein Foods at Every Meal
+ Prioritize high-quality, nutrient-dense protein + Consume meat with no or limited added
foods as part of a healthy dietary pattern. sugars, refined carbohydrates or starches,
or chemical additives. If preferred, flavor
+ Consume a variety of protein foods from
with salt, spices, and herbs.
animal sources, including eggs, poultry,
seafood, and red meat, as well as a variety + Protein serving goals: 1.2–1.6 grams of
of plant-sourced protein foods, including protein per kilogram of body weight per
beans, peas, lentils, legumes, nuts, seeds, day, adjusting as needed based on your
and soy. individual caloric requirements.
+ Swap deep-fried cooking methods with
baked, broiled, roasted, stir-fried, or grilled
cooking methods.
Consume Dairy
+ When consuming dairy, include full-fat dairy + Dairy serving goals: 3 servings per day
with no added sugars. Dairy is an excellent as part of a 2,000-calorie dietary pattern,
source of protein, healthy fats, vitamins, and adjusting as needed based on your
minerals. individual caloric requirements.
Gut Health
+ Your gut contains trillions of bacteria and other microorganisms called the microbiome.
A healthy diet supports a well-balanced microbiome and healthy digestion. Highly
processed foods can disrupt this balance, while vegetables, fruits, fermented
foods (e.g., sauerkraut, kimchi, kefir, miso), and high-fiber foods support a diverse
microbiome, which may be beneficial for health.
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 2

--- Page 4 ---
Eat Vegetables & Fruits Throughout the Day
+ Eat a variety of colorful, nutrient-dense + 100% fruit or vegetable juice should be
vegetables and fruits. consumed in limited portions or diluted
with water.
+ Eat whole vegetables and fruits in their
original form. Wash thoroughly prior to + Vegetables and fruits serving goals for
eating raw or cooking. a 2,000-calorie dietary pattern, adjusting as
needed based on your individual
+ Frozen, dried, or canned vegetables or fruits
caloric requirements:
with no or very limited added sugars can
also be good options. - Vegetables: 3 servings per day
+ If preferred, flavor with salt, spices, - Fruits: 2 servings per day
and herbs.
Incorporate Healthy Fats
+ Healthy fats are plentiful in many whole + In general, saturated fat consumption
foods, such as meats, poultry, eggs, should not exceed 10% of total daily
omega-3–rich seafood, nuts, seeds, full-fat calories. Significantly limiting highly
dairy, olives, and avocados. processed foods will help meet this goal.
More high-quality research is needed to
+ When cooking with or adding fats to meals,
determine which types of dietary fats best
prioritize oils with essential fatty acids, such
support long-term health.
as olive oil. Other options can include butter
or beef tallow.
Focus on Whole Grains
+ Prioritize fiber-rich whole grains. + Whole grains serving goals: 2–4 servings
per day, adjusting as needed based on your
+ Significantly reduce the consumption of
individual caloric requirements.
highly processed, refined carbohydrates,
such as white bread, ready-to-eat or
packaged breakfast options, flour tortillas,
and crackers.
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 3

--- Page 5 ---
Limit Highly Processed Foods, Added Sugars,
& Refined Carbohydrates
+ Avoid highly processed packaged, prepared, + While no amount of added sugars or
ready-to-eat, or other foods that are salty or non-nutritive sweeteners is recommended
sweet, such as chips, cookies, and candy or considered part of a healthy or nutritious
that have added sugars and sodium (salt). diet, one meal should contain no more than
Instead, prioritize nutrient-dense foods and 10 grams of added sugars.
home-prepared meals. When dining out,
+ When selecting snack foods, added sugar
choose nutrient-dense options.
limits should follow FDA “Healthy” claim
+ Limit foods and beverages that include limits. For example, grain snacks (e.g.,
artificial flavors, petroleum-based dyes, crackers) should not exceed 5 grams of
artificial preservatives, and low-calorie added sugar per ¾ ounce whole-grain
non-nutritive sweeteners. equivalent, and dairy snacks (e.g., yogurt)
should not exceed 2.5 grams of added sugar
+ Avoid sugar-sweetened beverages, such
per ⅔ cup equivalent.
as sodas, fruit drinks, and energy drinks.
Added Sugars
+ To help identify sources of added sugars, look for ingredients that include the word
“sugar” or “syrup” or end in “-ose.”
+ Added sugars may appear on ingredient labels under many different names, including
high-fructose corn syrup, agave syrup, corn syrup, rice syrup, fructose, glucose,
dextrose, sucrose, cane sugar, beet sugar, turbinado sugar, maltose, lactose, fruit
juice concentrate, honey, and molasses. Examples of non-nutritive sweeteners include
aspartame, sucralose, saccharin, xylitol, and acesulfame K.
+ Some foods and drinks, such as fruits and plain milk, have naturally occurring sugars.
The sugars in these foods are not considered added sugars.
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 4

--- Page 6 ---
Limit Alcoholic Beverages
+ Consume less alcohol for better amount they drink, and people taking
overall health. medications or with medical conditions
that can interact with alcohol. For those
+ People who should completely avoid
with a family history of alcoholism, be
alcohol include pregnant women, people
mindful of alcohol consumption and
who are recovering from alcohol use
associated addictive behaviors.
disorder or are unable to control the
Sodium
+ Sodium and electrolytes are essential for hydration. The general population, ages 14 and
above, should consume less than 2,300 mg per day of sodium. Highly active individuals
may benefit from increased sodium intake to offset sweat losses.
+ For children, the recommendations vary by age:
- Ages 1–3: less than 1,200 mg per day
- Ages 4–8: less than 1,500 mg per day
- Ages 9–13: less than 1,800 mg per day
+ Highly processed foods that are high in sodium should be avoided.
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 5

--- Page 7 ---
Special Populations & Considerations
Infancy & Early Childhood (Birth–4 Years)
+ For about the first 6 months of life, feed your baby as 4 to 6 months. This can be done by mixing a
only breast milk. When breast milk is not available, small amount of peanut butter with breast milk
feed your baby iron-fortified infant formula. or formula, thinning it to a safe consistency,
and feeding it by spoon. For infants with mild to
+ Continue breastfeeding as long as mutually desired
moderate eczema, introduce peanut-containing
by mother and child for 2 years or beyond. If
foods at around 6 months of age.
feeding or supplementing your baby with infant
formula, stop feeding your baby infant formula at + Introduce potentially allergenic foods—including
12 months of age and give them whole milk. nut butters, eggs, shellfish, and wheat—with other
complementary foods at about 6 months. Ask your
+ All breastfed infants, as well as infants who
infant’s health care professional about their risk for
consume less than 32 ounces of infant formula
food allergies and safe ways to introduce
per day, should receive a daily oral vitamin D
these foods.
supplement of 400 IU starting shortly after birth.
Consult your health care professional about vitamin + Infants should receive a diverse range of
D supplementation. nutrient-dense foods in appropriate textures, while
avoiding nutrient-poor and highly processed foods.
+ Some infants require iron supplementation.
Talk with your health care professional about + Examples of nutrient-dense foods to introduce
iron supplementation. during the complementary feeding period include:
+ At about 6 months of age, infants may begin - Meat, poultry, and seafood
to have solid foods. It is crucial to continue
- Vegetables and fruits
breastfeeding or formula feeding while solids are
- Full-fat yogurt and cheese
introduced. Breast milk or infant formula continues
to be the main source of nutrition for your infant up - Whole grains
to 12 months of age. - Legumes and nut- or seed-containing foods
- If your infant is at high risk for peanut allergy prepared in a safe, infant-appropriate form
(due to the presence of severe eczema and/ + Avoid added sugars during infancy and
or egg allergy), talk with your health care early childhood.
professional about peanut introduction as early
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 6

--- Page 8 ---
Introducing Food to Infants & Toddlers
+ Every child is different. Look for these signs that your child is developmentally ready to begin eating food:
- Sits up alone or with support
- Can control their head and neck
- Tries to grasp small objects, such as toys or food
- Brings objects to their mouth
- Opens their mouth when food is offered
- Moves food from the front to the back of their tongue to swallow
- Swallows food instead of pushing it back out onto their chin
+ Parents and caregivers can encourage healthy eating by offering new foods multiple times—it may take 8 to
10 exposures before a young child is willing to try a new food—and by modeling healthy eating behaviors.
Middle Childhood (5–10 Years)
+ Focus on whole, nutrient-dense foods such as + Avoid caffeinated beverages.
protein foods, dairy, vegetables, fruits, healthy
+ No amount of added sugars is recommended.
fats, and whole grains.
+ Make cooking meals fun and a regular part of
+ Full-fat dairy products are important for children
the household’s routine.
to help meet energy needs and support brain
development.
Adolescence (11–18 Years)
+ Adolescence is a rapid growth period with energy drinks and avoiding highly processed
increased needs for energy, protein, calcium, and foods. When access to nutrient-rich foods is
iron—especially for girls due to menstruation. limited, fortified foods or supplements may be
Adequate calcium and vitamin D are vital for peak needed under medical guidance.
bone mass.
+ Encourage adolescents to become active
+ Adolescents should eat nutrient-dense foods such participants in food shopping and cooking so they
as dairy, leafy greens, and iron-rich animal foods, learn how to make healthy food choices for life.
while significantly limiting sugary drinks and
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 7

--- Page 9 ---
Young Adulthood
+ Following the Dietary Guidelines will support bone health to achieve peak bone mass and peak
optimal health during this period, including bone strength is essential. Additionally, following
reducing risk of the onset or progression of the Dietary Guidelines can support reproductive
chronic disease and supporting other aspects of health for both women and men—with special
health. The brain continues to mature during young emphasis on healthy fats, iron, and folate for
adulthood. While the most significant increases in women and healthy fats and protein for men.
bone density occur during adolescence, optimizing
Pregnant Women
+ Pregnancy increases nutrient needs to support dairy, and low-mercury omega-3–rich
maternal health and fetal growth, with iron, folate, seafood (e.g., salmon, sardines, trout).
and iodine as top priorities.
+ Women should talk to their health care
+ Pregnant women should consume diverse nutrient- professional about taking a daily prenatal
dense foods, including iron-rich meats, folate-rich vitamin during pregnancy.
greens and legumes, choline-rich eggs, calcium-rich
Lactating Women
+ Lactation increases energy and nutrient needs eggs, and dairy; omega-3–rich seafood; folate-rich
to support milk production and maternal health. legumes; and vitamin A–rich vegetables.
Breastfeeding women should consume a wide
+ Women should talk to their health care professional
variety of nutrient-dense foods, including vitamin
about whether dietary supplements may be needed
B –rich protein sources such as meats, poultry,
while breastfeeding.
12
Older Adults
+ Some older adults need fewer calories but still eggs, legumes, and whole plant foods (vegetables
require equal or greater amounts of key nutrients and fruits, whole grains, nuts, and seeds). When
such as protein, vitamin B , vitamin D, and calcium. dietary intake or absorption is insufficient, fortified
12
To meet these needs, they should prioritize foods or supplements may be needed under
nutrient-dense foods such as dairy, meats, seafood, medical supervision.
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 8

--- Page 10 ---
Individuals with Chronic Disease
+ Following the Dietary Guidelines can help prevent + Individuals with certain chronic diseases may
the onset or slow the rate of progression of chronic experience improved health outcomes when
disease, especially cardiovascular disease, obesity, following a lower carbohydrate diet. Work with
and type 2 diabetes. If you have a chronic disease, your health care professional to identify and adopt
talk with your health care professional to see if you a diet that is appropriate for you and your health
need to adapt the Dietary Guidelines to meet your condition.
specific needs.
Vegetarians & Vegans
+ Consume a variety of whole foods, especially show broader shortfalls in vitamins A, D, E, B ,
6
protein-rich foods, such as dairy, eggs, beans, peas, and B ; riboflavin; niacin; choline; calcium; iron;
12
lentils, legumes, nuts, seeds, tofu, or tempeh. magnesium; phosphorus; potassium; zinc; and
protein. Monitor nutrient status periodically,
+ Significantly limit highly processed vegan or
especially for iron, vitamin B , vitamin D, calcium,
vegetarian foods that can include added fats,
12
and iodine.
sugars, and salt.
+ To avoid nutrient gaps, prioritize targeted
+ Pay careful attention to potential nutrient gaps
supplementation, diversify plant protein sources
when consuming a vegetarian or vegan diet.
for amino acid balance, and enhance mineral
Vegetarian diets often fall short in vitamins D
bioavailability through food preparation techniques.
and E, choline, and iron, whereas vegan diets
January 2026 Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025–2030 | 9
