
--- Page 1 ---
NSCA Strength and
Conditioning
Professional Standards
and Guidelines
A B S T R A C T understand that this standard of care analysis of claims and litigation,
is a shared duty; the institution and and a consensus of expert views.
THISISTHEUPDATEDVERSIONOF
individual are thus jointly responsible However, this information is not
THENSCASTRENGTH ANDCON-
forfulfillingit.Collectively,theseissues a substitute for individualized judg-
DITIONING PROFESSIONAL
are the driving forces behind this ment or independent professional
STANDARDS ANDGUIDELINES.
project. advice.
THELASTUPDATEWASPER-
The purpose of the NSCA Strength Neither the NSCA nor the contribu-
FORMEDIN2009.
and Conditioning Professional tors to this project assume any duty
Standards and Guidelines document owed to third parties by those read-
The Strength and Conditioning
is to help identify areas of liability ing, interpreting, or implementing
profession involves the com-
exposure, increase safety, and this information. When rendering
bined competencies of sport/
decrease the likelihood of injuries services to third parties, these stand-
exercise science, administration, man-
that might lead to legal claims and ards and guidelines cannot be adop-
agement, teaching, and coaching.
suits, and ultimately improve the ted for use with all participants
Practitioners must also comply with
standard of care being offered. This withoutexercisingindependentjudg-
various laws and regulations while re-
document is intended to be neither ment and decision-making based on
sponding to instances of potential
rigid nor static and will be updated the Strength and Conditioning pro-
injury and related claims and suits.
periodically to reflect the industry’s fessional’s individual training, educa-
This creates remarkable challenges
best practices. It is hoped that tion, and experience. Furthermore,
and requires substantial experience,
Strength and Conditioning practi- Strength and Conditioning practi-
expertise,andotherresourcestoeffec-
tioners and the institutions employ- tioners must stay abreast of new
tively address them, especially in mul-
ing them will mutually benefit from developments in the profession so
tisport (e.g., collegiate and scholastic)
applyingthisinformation,andinturn that these standards and guidelines
settings.
significantly enhance the quality of mayevolvetomeetparticularservice
Ampleresourcesareavailableinsome services and programs provided to needs.
of these settings but in many others, their participants.
Neither the NSCA nor the contribu-
however,theyarenot.Budgets,equip-
tors to this project, by reason of
ment, facilities, and staff are often lim- NOTICE
authorship or publication of this doc-
ited (or lacking altogether), with This document is intended to pro-
ument,shallbedeemedtobeengaged
aresultingmismatchbetweenthepar- vide relevant practice parameters
in practice of any branch of profes-
ticipants’demandforsafeandeffective for Strength and Conditioning pro-
sionaldiscipline(e.g.,medicine,phys-
programsandservices,andtheinstitu- fessionals to use when carrying out
ical therapy, law) reserved for those
tion’sprovisionofthem.Itisimportant their responsibilities in providing
licensed under state law. Strength
for Strength and Conditioning practi- services to athletes or other partici-
and Conditioning practitioners using
tioners and their employers to pants. The standards and guidelines
presented here are based on
KEY WORDS:
AddresscorrespondencetotheNSCA published scientific studies, pertinent principlesofpractice
NationalOfficeatnsca@nsca.com. statements from other associations,
1
Copyright(cid:1)NationalStrengthandConditioningAssociation StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 2 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
(cid:1)
this information are encouraged to Liability: a legal responsibility, duty, standards of practice or to give rise
seekandobtainsuchadvice,ifneeded or obligation. Strength and Condi- to legally defined duties of care, but
or desired, from those licensed tioning professionals have a duty to in certain circumstances they could
professionals. the participants they serve to take assist in evaluating and improving
reasonable steps to prevent injury services rendered.
andtoactprudentlywhenaninjury While the publication of this docu-
INTRODUCTION
occurs (5). ment does not amount to a judicial
(cid:1)
SCOPEOF PRACTICE Negligence:failuretoactasareason- determination of the standard of care
The legal responsibilities and profes- able and prudent person would to be applied in a particular case, it is
sional scope of practice for Strength undersimilarcircumstances.Fourel- presumed that the standards stated
and Conditioning professionals can ementsmustexistforaStrengthand hereinwilllikelybegivenauthoritative
be subdivided into 2 domains: (42) Conditioning professional to be weight in actual litigations.
“Scientific Foundations” and “Practi- found liable for negligence: duty,
cal/Applied”. Each of these involves breach of duty, proximate cause,
Published standards of practice 5
corresponding activities, responsibil- and damages (47). Simply stated,
potential legal duties. Proof of duty
ities, and knowledge requirements aStrengthandConditioningprofes-
orstandardofcareinanegligencecase
(refer to Appendices 1 and 2): sionalisnegligentifhe/sheisproven
can be determined in various ways,
to have a duty to act and to have
oneofwhichisfromstandardsofprac-
Scientific foundations. failed to act with the appropriate
(cid:1) tice published by professional associa-
Exercise Sciences (e.g., Anatomy, standard of care, proximately caus-
tions and organizations. In actual
Exercise Physiology, Biomechanics, ing injury or damages to another
litigation, published standards of prac-
Sport Psychology) person.
(cid:1) (cid:1) tice can be introduced through expert
Nutrition Standardofcare:whataprudentand
testimonyorinthediscoveryphaseof
reasonable person would do under
pretrial to help determine whether
Practical/Applied. similar circumstances. A Strength
(cid:1) Exercise Technique andConditioning professionalisex- a defendant was negligent in carrying
(cid:1) Program Design pected to act according to his/her outhis/herlegalduties(9).Thecurrent
(cid:1) Organization and Administration education, training, and certification trend in most jurisdictions is to allow
(cid:1) Testing and Evaluation status (e.g., CSCS, NSCA-CPT, suchstandardsasadmissibleevidence,
wheretheyaregenerallyrecognizedas
EMT, cardiopulmonary resuscita-
being indicative of widely accepted
LEGALDUTIESANDCONCEPTS tion[CPR],automatedexternaldefi-
practices.Furthermore,courtsexamin-
Strength and Conditioning practi- brillator [AED], First Aid).
ing these issues in negligence cases
tioners have legal duties to provide
haveruledthatviolationsofsuchpro-
an appropriate level of supervision Standards versus guidelines. It is
fessional standards often constitute
and instruction to meet a reasonable important to distinguish between
a breach of duty.
standard of care and to provide and “standards” and “guidelines” because
maintain a safe environment for the each term has different legal implica- If properly adopted and applied, pub-
participants under their supervision. tions (9,60): lished standards of practice
(cid:1)
These duties also involve informing Standard: a required procedure that can minimize liability exposures asso-
users of risks inherent in and related probablyreflectsalegaldutyorobli- ciated with negligence, and thereby
to their activities, and preventing gationforstandardofcare(notethat serve as a potential shield for those
unreasonable risk or harm resulting the standard statements in this doc- whocomplywiththem.Theycanalso
from“negligent instructionorsupervi- ument use the word “must”). The be used as a sword against those who
sion(16,17,21).”StatlerandBrown(56) standardssetforthinthisdocument do not comply, potentially increasing
summarize the following key liability may ultimately be recognized as liability risks associated with negli-
concepts for the Strength and Condi- alegalstandardofcaretobeimple- gence(9). Thekey issuein this regard
tioning professional: mented into the daily operations of seems to be the practitioner’s consis-
(cid:1)
Assumptionofrisk:voluntarypartic- strength and conditioning programs tent application of established stand-
ipationinactivitywithknowledgeof and facilities. ards of practice in the provision of
(cid:1)
the inherent risk(s). Athletic activi- Guideline: a recommended operat- daily service. For example, if his/her
ties, including strength and condi- ingprocedureformulatedanddevel- conductisproventobeconsistentwith
tioning, involve certain risks. oped to further enhance the quality acceptedstandard(s),itwillbedifficult
Participants must be thoroughly of services provided (note that the to show breach of duty, thereby pro-
informed of the risks of activity, guideline statements in this docu- vidingprotectionagainstnegligence.If
and required to sign a statement to mentusetheword“should”).Guide- his/her conduct is not proven to be
that effect. lines are not intended to be consistent with accepted standard(s),
2
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 3 ---
however, it may be easier for the TX: NATA, 2016. Available the various aspects of the process.
injured party to show breach of duty at: http://www.bocatc.org/public- Eickhoff-Shemek (10) proposes a 4-step
duetofailuretofollowsuchstandards, protection#standards-disciplineAc- procedureforapplyingstandardsofprac-
which can lead to a ruling of cessed 11/5/2017. ticetotheriskmanagementprocess:
(cid:1)
negligence. President’s Council on Fitness, 1. Identifyandselectstandardsofpractice,
Sports and Nutrition. The Role of aswellasallapplicablelaws.Because
TYPESOFSTANDARDS Resistance Training for Children so many standards of practice are
Inadditiontostandardsfordesiredoper- and Adolescents. Available at: published by various organizations,
ational practices published by profes- http://www.fitness.gov/blog-posts/ itischallengingfortheStrengthand
sional organizations such as the NSCA, role_resistance_training.html.Accessed Conditioning professional to be
there are also standards for technical/ 11/5/2017. awareofallofthem,anddetermine
physical specifications published by (cid:1) SocietyofHealthandPhysicalEdu- which ones are appropriate when
independent organizations such as the cators. Quality Coaches, Quality implementing the risk management
AmericanSocietyforTestingandMate- Sports:NationalStandardsforSport plan. In terms of participant safety,
rials(ASTM)orU.S.ConsumerProduct Coaches (2nd ed). Champaign, IL: the most conservative or stringent
Safety Commission (CPSC). These are Human Kinetics, 2006. standardsinagivenindustryshould
brieflydescribedbelow: (cid:1) US Center for SafeSport. Available generally be used.
at: https://safesport.org/ Accessed 2. Developrisk management strategies re-
Operational practices. In a negligence 11/5/2017. flecting standards of practice and all
lawsuit, established standards of care applicable laws. This step involves
can be used to gauge a practitioner’s Technicalandphysicalspecifications. writing procedures describing spe-
professional competence by compar- Technical and physical specifications cific responsibilities and/or duties
inghis/heractualconductwithwritten of equipment and facilities relevant to that staff would carry out in partic-
benchmarks of expected behavior. In the Strength andConditioning profes- ular situations. The procedures
addition to the standards and guide- sion have been published by the shouldbewrittenclearly,succinctly,
linesfromalliedprofessionalorganiza- and without excessive detail (too
ASTMandCPSC.TheCPSCalsoop-
tions such as the American College of muchdetailmaynotallowtheflex-
erates the National Electronic Injury
Sports Medicine (ACSM) (3,12,60), ibility practitioners need in particu-
SurveillanceSystem(NEISS),asurveil-
American Heart Association (AHA) lar situations and make
lance and follow-back system that
(3,35,36), and National AthleticTrain- implementation of those strategies
gathers data from hospital emergency
ers’ Association (NATA) (39) refer- difficult or impractical). Once the
departments to provide timely infor-
enced in this document, the following written procedures are finalized,
mation on consumer injuries associ-
associationshavealsopublishedstand- ated with certain products or they should be included in the staff
ards of practice: activities. Some of these data have policies and procedures manual.
(cid:1)
Aerobics and Fitness Association of been used to research weight training 3. Implement the risk management plan.
America. Exercise Standards and injuries, as will be addressed in the Implementation of the risk manage-
Guidelines (4th ed). Ventura, CA: ment plan primarily involves staff
Injury Trends, Litigations, and Stan-
AFAA, 2002. training to ensure that the practi-
dard of Care Load section.
(cid:1)
American Academy of Pediatrics. tioner’s daily conduct will be consis-
Strength training by children and STANDARDSOFPRACTICEAS tent with written policies and
adolescents. Pediatrics 121: 835–840, THEYAPPLYTORISK procedures and selected laws and
2008. Available at: http://pediatrics. MANAGEMENT standards of practice. The policies
aappublications.org/content/121/ Riskmanagementisaproactiveadmin- andproceduresmanualshouldbeused
4/835. Accessed11/5/2017. istrative process that helps minimize inconjunctionwiththeinitialtraining
(cid:1)
American Physical Therapy Associ- legalliability,aswellasdecreasethefre- of new employees, as well as during
ation. Guide to Physical Therapist quencyandseverityofinjuriesandsub- regular in-service training, where all
Practice (2nd ed). Alexandria, VA: sequent claims and lawsuits (8). It may employees practice a particular (e.g.,
APTA, 2003. not be possible to eliminate all risks of emergency) procedure. From a legal
(cid:1)
National Association for Sport and injury and liability exposure in strength perspective, it is also important to
Physical Education. Moving Into and conditioning settings; however, it explain to staff why it is essential to
the Future: National Standards for can be effectively minimized and miti- carryoutsuchdutiesappropriately.
Physical Education (2nd edition). gatedbyimplementingsoundriskman- 4. Evaluate the risk management plan.
Reston, VA: NASPE, 2004. agement strategies. The Strength and Like the law, standards of practice
(cid:1)
National Athletic Trainers’ Associa- Conditioning practitioner is ultimately are not static and need to be up-
tionBoardofCertification.Standards responsible for risk management, but datedperiodicallytoreflectchange.
of Professional Practice. Dallas, all facility staff should be involved in The risk management plan should
3
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 4 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
beformally evaluated atleastannu- which includes an orthopedic evalua- athletes are not subject to unacceptable
ally, as well as after each incidence tion. Some type of cardiovascular risks. Support for such efforts, espe-
of accident or injury to determine screening, as discussed below, is also ciallyinlargeathleticpopulations,is
whether emergency procedures recommended.TheStrengthandCon- mitigated by cost-efficiency consid-
were performed correctly and what ditioning staff should receive docu- erations,practicallimitations,andan
could be done to prevent a similar mentation about any condition that awareness that it is not possible to
incident in the future. wouldpotentiallyrequirespecialtrain- achieve zero risk in competitive
ing considerations (e.g., sickle-cell dis- sports.
LIABILITY EXPOSUREINTHE ease), even if the participant has been (cid:1) Preparticipation athletic screening
STRENGTHANDCONDITIONING given medicalclearance to participate. shouldbeperformedbyaproperlyqual-
PROFESSION
Participantswhoarereturningfroman ified health care provider with the req-
While each strength and conditioning
injury or illness must also be required uisite training, medical skills, and
program and facility is unique, the
to provide documentation of medical backgroundtoreliablyperformaphysi-
NSCA Professional Standards and
clearancebeforereturningtoastrength cal examination, obtain a detailed car-
Guidelines Task Force has identified
and conditioning program. Therefore, diovascularhistory,andrecognizeheart
9 areas of potential liability exposure,
communication between the Sports disease. A licensed physician is pre-
as delineated below. It is important to
Medicine/Athletic Training staff and ferred, but an appropriately trained
note that they are interrelated. For
the Strength and Conditioning staff registered nurse or physician assis-
example,properinstructionandsuper- must be clear and timely. tantmaybeacceptableundercertain
vision is associated with personnel circumstances in states where non-
qualifications, as well as facility layout Currently, there are no universally physician health care workers are
andschedulingissues.Noncompliance accepted standards for screening par- permitted to perform preparticipa-
inanyareacanthereforeaffectothers, ticipants nor are there approved certi-
tionscreening.Inthelattersituation,
and in turn compound the risk of lia- fication procedures for health care
however, a formal certification pro-
bilityexposureandpotentiallitigation. professionals who perform such ex-
cessshouldbeestablishedtodemon-
Furthermore, theStrengthandCondi- aminations. However, a joint Pre-
strate expertise in performing
tioning practitioner and his/her Participation Physical Evaluation Task
cardiovascular examinations.
employersharethecorrespondingdu- Force of 6 organizations (American (cid:1)
A complete and careful personal and
ties and responsibilities. AcademyofFamilyPhysicians,Amer-
family medical history and physical
ican Academy of Pediatrics, American
Collectivelywithintheseliabilityexpo- examination designed to identify (or
College of Sports Medicine, American
sure areas, 11 standards and 14 guide- raise suspicion of) cardiovascular risk
Medical Society for Sports Medicine,
lines for Strength and Conditioning factors known to cause sudden death
American Orthopaedic Society for
practitioners have further been identi- or disease progression is the best avail-
Sports Medicine, and American Oste-
fied (these are presented in the next able and most practical approach to
opathic Academy of Sports Medicine)
section of this document). These screening populations of competitive
standards and guidelines are intended has published a widely accepted sports participants. Such screening is
to serve as an authoritative and unbi- monograph including detailed instruc- an obtainable objective, and should
ased source for professional guidance. tions on performing apreparticipation bemandatoryforallparticipants.Ini-
The rationale for each is summa- history and physical examination, tiallyacompletemedicalhistoryand
rized below. determining clearance for participa- physicalexaminationshouldbeper-
tion, and a medical evaluation form formed before participation in orga-
Preparticipation screening and clear- to copy and use for each examination nized high school athletics (grades
ance.Aphysicalexaminationisimper- (46). In addition, the American Heart 9–12). An interim history should be
ative for all participants before Association and American College of obtained in intervening years. For
participating in a strength and condi- Sports Medicine have published state- collegiate athletes, a comprehensive
tioning program and should be per- ments on preparticipation screening personal/familyhistoryandphysical
formed by a properly qualified health for those involved in fitness-related examinationshouldbeperformedby
care provider with the requisite train- activities (3,35,36). Relevant points a qualified examiner initially on
ing, medical skills, and background to are summarized as follows: entering the institution, before
(cid:1)
reliably perform a physical examina- Educational institutions have an ethi- beginning training and competition.
tion.Thisshouldincludeacomprehen- cal, medical, and possible legal obliga- Screening should be repeated every
sive health and immunization history tion to implement cost-efficient 2 years thereafter unless more fre-
(as defined by current guidelines from preparticipation screening strategies quent examinations are indicated;
the Centers for Disease Control and (including a complete medical history and an interim history and blood
Prevention (CDC)), as well as a rele- andphysicalexamination),andthereby pressuremeasurementshouldbeob-
vant physical examination, part of ensure that high school and college tained each subsequent year to
4
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 5 ---
determinewhetheranotherphysical and also helps to identify an educa- qualified professionals with interde-
examination, and possible further tional career path for the Strength pendent expertise and shared leader-
testing, is required (e.g., due to andConditioningprofession.Likewise, ship roles; see Appendix 3) (27,28).
abnormalities or changes in medical practitioners should make an ongoing ThescopeofpracticefortheStrength
status). effort to acquire knowledge and com- and Conditioning profession has
(cid:1)
Health appraisal questionnaires should petence in the content areas outside expanded and diversified to the point
be used before exercise testing and/or their primary area of expertise. In where it isvery challenging, andoften
trainingtoinitiallyclassifyparticipants 2004, the Commission on Accredita- unrealistic, for each individual to
by risk for triage and preliminary deci- tion of Allied Health Education Pro- acquireproficiencyinallareas.There-
sion-making. After the initial health grams (CAAHEP) began accrediting fore, specific roles and responsibilities
appraisal (and medical consultation programsinexercisescienceandexer- mustbeoutlinedandunderstoodbyall
and/or supervised exercise test, if cise physiology (https://www.caahep. members of the Strength and Condi-
indicated), participants can be fur- org/ Accessed 11/5/2017), so if the tioning staff and matched with each
ther classified for exercise training practitioner is unable to attend an person’s training and experience. The
on the basis of individual character- NSCA-ERP institution, training in an productivity of a hierarchical (single-
istics. When a medical evaluation/ leader)workgroupcanbesignificantly
accreditedprograminexercisescience
recommendation is advised or improvedbyapplyingtheteammodel
orexercisephysiologywillensurethat
required,writtenandactivecommu- to staffing; the same team dynamics
the “Scientific Foundations” are thor-
nicationbetweenfacilitystaffandthe that augment the group’s effectiveness
oughly covered.
participant’s personal physician or also tend to enhance individual mem-
High school settings are unique in
health care provider is strongly rec- bers’learningandskillacquisition(27).
that most teaching positions require
ommended. Furthermore, partici-
a teacher certification from an ac-
pants should be educated about the
credited program, typically in Physi- Program supervision and instruction.
importanceofobtainingaprepartici-
pation health appraisal and medical cal Education, for an individual who Although serious accidents are rare in
evaluation/recommendation(ifindi- will be working with students in an supervised exercise programs, the lia-
cated), as well as the potential risks athleticsetting.TheSocietyofHealth bility costs associated with inadequate
incurred without obtaining them. and Physical Educators (SHAPE), or lax supervision are very expensive,
formerly known as AAHPERD, has andtheplaintiff’srecoveryrateinsuch
also created national standards and negligence lawsuits can be high. The
Personnel qualifications. Qualified guidelines for physical education maincausesoftheseincidentsarepoor
and knowledgeable personnel must teacher education that address the facility maintenance, defective equip-
be hired to properly supervise and unique issues pertinent to exercise ment, and inadequate instruction or
instruct participants using Strength supervision.Theimportanceofstaffing
andsportinthehighschoolenviron-
and Conditioning facilities and equip- is readily apparent in each circum-
ment (https://www.shapeamerica.
ment. A three-pronged approach is stance. For example, Rabinoff (48) re-
org/Accessed 11/5/2017).
recommended. viewed 32 litigations arising from
Second,accreditedcertificationsoffered
negligent weight training supervision
First, the Strength and Conditioning
throughprofessionalorganizationswith
and found that 3 issues were raised
practitioner should acquire expertise,
continuingeducationrequirementsand
bytheplaintiff’sattorneysineachcase:
and have a degree from an accredited
acodeofethics(e.g.,theCSCScreden-
poor instruction (or instructor qualifi-
college/university in one or more of
tial; see Appendix 2) are available to cations);lax/poorsupervision;andfail-
the topics comprising the “Scientific
StrengthandConditioningpractitioners uretowarnofinherentdangers(inthe
Foundations” domain identified in the
interested in acquiring the necessary equipment, facility, or exercise). The
Certified Strength and Conditioning
competencies. Depending on the prac- standard of care used in each case
Specialist (CSCS) Examination Con-
titioner’sspecificduties,responsibilities, was based on statements established
tent Description (42) (i.e., anatomy,
and interests, relevant certifications by the NSCA, ACSM, or SHAPE. A
exercise/sportphysiology,biomechan-
offered by other governing bodies prevalenttrendinsuchlitigationsisthe
ics, sport psychology, nutrition; see
may also be appropriate, depending issueof“professionalinstructorqualifi-
Appendix 1), or in a related subject
on the requirements for obtaining and cations,” such as appropriate degrees,
(e.g., exercise/sport pedagogy, psy-
maintainingcertification. recognized certifications, training,
chology, motor learning, training
experience, and continuing education
methodology, kinesiology). Note that Third, a Strength and Conditioning
(refer to guideline 2, and Appendices
the NSCA’s Education Recognition practitioner’s knowledge and skill
1 and 2).
Program (ERP) has been developed development can be enhanced by
to recognize institutions of higher applyingthe“performanceteam”con- Participants in a Strength and Condi-
learning that meet such requirements, cept (i.e., aligning a staff comprised of tioning facility must be properly
5
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 6 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
supervised and instructed at all times or guided-resistance exercises) and required number of qualified staff
to ensure maximum safety, especially thecorrespondingneedforcoaching should be present, such that recom-
because of the athletic, skillful nature and spotting. mended guidelines for minimum aver-
of many activities implemented in In an ideal world, strength and condi- age floor space allowance per
strength and conditioning programs, tioning activities should be scheduled participant (100 ft2), minimum
inaccordancewiththedynamiccorre- to distribute activity throughout the professional-to-participant ratios (1:10
spondence(54)andpracticespecificity day, and thereby promote an optimal junior high school, 1:15 high school,
(49,50) principles. Bucher and Krotee training environment (refer to Appen- 1:20 college), and number of partici-
(5) recommend the following cardinal dix4forbasicguidelinesoncalculating pants per barbell or training station
principles of supervision: space needs). Even with careful plan- (upto3)areappliedduringpeakusage
(cid:1)
Always be there (mentally and ning, however, most facilities have times (2,23,56). In general circumstan-
physically). times of peak usage (e.g., as a result ces,thiscorrespondsto1Strengthand
(cid:1)
Be active and hands-on. ofteampracticesandparticipants’class Conditioning practitioner per 3–4
(cid:1)
Be prudent, careful, and prepared schedules).Beyondacertainpoint,itis training stations and/or 1,000 ft2 area
(e.g., knowledgeable of proper tech- impractical to simply spread strength (juniorhighschool);5trainingstations
nique/spotting, program design). andconditioningactivitiesoverawider and/or1,500ft2area(highschool);or
(cid:1)
Be qualified (e.g., accredited degree, range of times to maintain an accept- 6–7 training stations and/or 2,000 ft2
CSCS/NSCA-CPT, CPR/AED, able professional-to-participant ratio. area (college), respectively. It is
First Aid). The central issue is to accommodate extremelyimportanttonotethatthese
(cid:1)
Be vigilant. peak usage times by providing ade- ratiosdonottakeintoaccounttheuse
(cid:1)
Inform participants of safety and quate facilities and qualified staff, such of complex lifts such as the weightlift-
emergency procedures. that all participants are properly in- ing movements and their derivations,
(cid:1)
Know participants’ health status. structedandsupervised(refertoguide- or the use of the primary structural
(cid:1)
Monitor and enforce rules and line2)(23,31,60).Furthermore,proper (multijoint) free-weight exercises.
regulations. techniques,movementmechanics,and Therefore, amuch smallersupervision
(cid:1)
Monitor and scrutinize the safety should be emphasized ratioiswarrantedinthesecircumstan-
environment. to minimize injury risk and liability ces (e.g., 1:12 instead of 1:20 for
Inadditiontothephysicalandmental exposure(7,14,25)(alsoseetheNSCA college-level). In addition, there are
presence of qualified professionals position statements summarized in no data regarding how the ratios
during strength and conditioning Appendix 5). Likewise, instructional should differ with training status.
activities,effectiveinstructionandsuper- methods,procedures,andprogressions Therefore, professional discretion
visioninvolvesarangeof practical con- that are consistent with accepted pro- should be used to adjust these guide-
siderations(2,4,19,21,23,56,59): fessional practices should be used lineswithrespecttothepracticalcon-
(cid:1)
Aclearviewofallareasofthefacil- (45,49,50,54,57,58). siderations discussed above.
ity, oratleastthezonebeingsuper-
vised by each practitioner and the Whilereasonablestepsshouldbetaken Second, Strength and Conditioning
participantsinit.Thisissueisrelated to make optimal use of the Strength practitioners and their employers
tofacilitydesignandlayout,encom- and Conditioning facility and staff, should work together toward a long-
passing equipment placement with apotentialmismatchbetweenavailable term(e.g.,3–5years)goalofmatching
respect to visibility, versatility, and resources and demand for programs the professional-to-participant ratio in
accessibility. (refer to standard 4) and services exists in many institutions the Strength and Conditioning facility
(cid:1) The practitioner’s proximity to the during times of peak usage. As ex- to each sport’s respective coach-to-
group of participants under his/her plainedbelowintheInjuryTrends,Lit- athleteratio.Thisisrelativelystraight-
supervision.Thisincludestheability igations, and Standard of Care Load forwardincollegiatesettingswherethe
section, the combined effects of expo-
toseeandcommunicateclearlywith NCAA limits the number of coaches
nential growth in collegiate/scholastic
oneanother,andquickaccesstopar- persportinDivisionI(NCAADivision
athleteparticipation,correspondinglia-
ticipantsinneedofimmediateassis- I Manual, Bylaw 11.7; updated annu-
bility exposures, and equal opportu-
tance or spotting. ally)andalsoprovidessportsparticipa-
(cid:1) Thenumberandgroupingofpartic- nity/access laws create a remarkable tion data (refer to Appendix 6; note
standardofcareloadandliabilitychal-
ipants to make optimal use of avail- that coach-to-athlete ratios for
lenge for Strength and Conditioning
able equipment, space, and time. individual-event sports are lower than
(cid:1) The participants’ age(s), experience practitioners and their employers. A those for team sports) (40). In the
2-pronged approach can thus be
level(s), and need(s). absenceofsimilarinformationinother
(cid:1) The type of program being con- recommended. (e.g.,scholastic)settings,suchdetermi-
ducted (e.g., skillful/explosive free- First, strength andconditioning activi- nations can be made on an individual
weight movements versus machine ties should be planned, and the institution basis; or possibly according
6
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 7 ---
(cid:1)
to trends within a district, division, Buy the equipment exclusively from Association and International Liai-
or state. reputablemanufacturers,andbecer- son Committee on Resuscitation
tain that it meets existing standards (1). Several organizations, such as
andguidelinesforprofessional/com- the American Heart Association,
Facilityandequipmentset-up,inspec-
mercial (not home) use. Red Cross, National Safety Council,
tion, maintenance, repair, and sign-
(cid:1)
Usetheequipmentonlyforthepur- and St. John Ambulance, offer
age. In some cases, Strength and
pose intended by the manufacturer; acceptable certifications. First Aid
Conditioning professionals are
donotmodify itfromthecondition training and certification may also
involvedinallphasesoffacilitydesign
inwhichitwasoriginallysoldunless benecessaryifSportsMedicineper-
and layout. Perhaps more commonly,
such adaptations are clearly desig- sonnel such as an MD, PA, or ATC
however, they assume responsibility
nated and instructions for doing so are not immediately available.
for an existing facility, in which case
(cid:1)
are included in the product Adhere to universal precautions for
the opportunities to plan or modify it
information. preventing exposure to and trans-
may be limited. In either case, the
(cid:1)
Post any signage provided by the mission of bloodborne pathogens,
Strength and Conditioning practi-
manufactureron(orincloseproxim- as established by the CDC (51),
tionerandhis/heremployerarejointly
ity to) the equipment. Occupational Safety and Health
responsible for maximizing the safety,
(cid:1)
Do not allow unsupervised partici- Administration (OSHA) (43), and
effectiveness, and efficiency of the
pants to use the equipment. the NCAA Sports Medicine Hand-
facility, such that the allotted space
(cid:1)
Regularly inspect the equipment for book(44).BloodborneandAirborne
and time can be put to optimal use
damage and wear that may place Pathogens Training by the National
(24) (also see Appendix 4).
participants at risk for injury. Safety Council may be necessary if
TheStrengthandConditioningprofes-
personnelarenotimmediatelyavail-
sional should establish written policies
abletoproperlyrespondtoexposure
and procedures for equipment/facility
Emergency planning and response. to blood or other potentially infec-
selection, purchase, installation, set-up,
Anemergencyresponseplanisawrit- tious materials.
inspection, cleaning, maintenance, and
ten document that details the proper
repair. Safety audits and periodic in-
procedures for caring for participants
spections of equipment, maintenance,
who incur injuries during activity as Records and record keeping. Docu-
repair, and status reports should all be
wellaslightningsafety(refertoAppen- mentation is fundamental to the man-
included. Manufacturer-provided user
dix 7 for sample guidelines). While all agement of strength and conditioning
manuals, warranties, and operating
Strength and Conditioning facilities programs and facilities. In addition to
guides, and other relevant records
should have such a document, it is developing and maintaining a policies
(e.g.,pertainingtoequipmentselection,
importanttoappreciatethatthedocu- and procedures manual (56), a variety
purchase, installation, set-up, inspec-
mentitselfdoes notsavelives.Indeed, of records should be kept on file (5):
tion, cleaning, maintenance and repair; (cid:1)
itmayofferafalsesenseofsecurityifit Personnel credentials
refertoguideline6),shouldbekepton (cid:1)
is not backed up with appropriate Professionalstandardsandguidelines
file and followed regarding equipment (cid:1)
trainingandpreparednessbyqualified, Policies and procedures for opera-
operation andmaintenance(5).
professionalstaff.Therefore,allperson- tion and safety, including a written
The Strength and Conditioning pro- nelinStrengthandConditioningfacil- emergency response plan (refer to
fessional should understand the con- ities must: standard 5; Appendix 7)
(cid:1) (cid:1)
cept of “product liability,” which Know the emergency response plan Manufacturer-provided user’s man-
refers to the legal responsibilities of and the proper procedures for deal- uals, warranties, and operating
aproductmanufacturerand/orvendor ingwithanemergency(e.g.,location guides; and equipment selection,
if a person sustains injury or damage of phones, activating emergency purchase,installation,set-up,inspec-
due primarilyto adefect or deficiency medicalservices,designatedperson- tion, cleaning, maintenance, and
indesignormanufacturing(56).While nel to care for injured participants, repair records
(cid:1)
thisissueappliestomanufacturersand ambulance access, and location of Injury/incident reports, prepartici-
vendors, there are actions and/or be- emergency supplies). pation medical clearance, and re-
(cid:1)
haviors that can increase the Strength Reviewandpracticeemergencypol- turn to participation clearance
and Conditioning professional’s icies and procedures regularly (e.g., documents (after the occurrence of
responsibility, consequently putting at least quarterly). an injury, illness, change in health
(cid:1)
him/her at risk for claims or suits Maintain current certification in status or an extended period of
(16). The following steps should be guidelines for cardiopulmonary absence) for each participant under
taken to minimize liability exposures resuscitationandautomatedexternal their supervision
(cid:1)
caused by strength and conditioning defibrillators (CPR-AED) as estab- In collegiate and scholastic settings,
equipment (5,11,30): lished by the American Heart athletes are required to sign
7
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 8 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
protective legal documents (e.g., a Strength and Conditioning profes- 20highlights.pdf Accessed 11/5/
informedconsent,agreementtopar- sional witnesses any discriminatory or 2017). This has clear implications
ticipate, waiver, personal contract; unequal treatment of individuals or regarding the importance of supervis-
refertoAppendix8)coveringallath- teams while performing duties in the ing children in these age groups, and
letically related activities, including scope of employment, the illegal con- their exposure to such equipment or
strengthandconditioning;however, duct must be immediately reported to facilities. In support of this, Malina
in other settings, the Strength and a supervisor, compliance department, (34) reported that estimated injury
Conditioning professional should and/or the general counsel for the rates in resistance training programs
consider having participants sign employment entity. To protect the were 0.176, 0.053, and 0.055 per 100
such legal documents interests of the Strength and Condi- participant-hours in pre- and early-
(cid:1)
Training logs, progress entries and/ tioning professional, it is also recom- pubertal youth, respectively, in the
or activity instruction/supervi- mended to consult with a private programs examined. Twenty-two
sion notes legal entity when the foregoing situa- studies were examined and all used
Legal and medical records should be tion is encountered. high levels of supervision and low
kept on file as long as possible in the instructor to participant ratios, which
event of an injury claim or suit. Stat- was believed to be the reason for the
Participation in strength and condi-
utes of limitations (i.e., the time in extremelylowinjuryrates.
tioning activities by children. Resis-
which individuals may file a lawsuit)
Another area of potential injury con-
tance training can be an important
vary from state to state, so it is good
cernforchildrenandpubescents/ado-
component of youth fitness, health
practicetomaintainfilesindefinitelyor
lescents is the use of maximum (max)
promotion, and injury prevention.
consult with a legal authority (22). All
testing (one repitition maximum
Suchprogramsaresafewhenproperly
records should be kept as securely as
[1RM]).WhileFaigenbaumandothers
designed and supervised, and can
possible,withlimitedaccessbyanyone
(12,13,32,33) have shown max testing
increase children’s strength, motor fit-
not on staff. Examples of securing re-
to be safe in these age groups, it is
nessskills,sportsperformance,psycho-
cordsincludelockedfilingcabinetsand
emphasized that maintaining proper
social well-being, and overall health
password-protected computers and
technique is critical. As an alternative,
(12,32,33).Indeed,manyofthebenefits
computer files. As is the case with
simple field-based measures such as
associatedwithadultstrengthandcon-
other organizational and administra-
verticaljump,longjump,andhandgrip
ditioning activities are attainable by
tive tasks, it is necessary to have ade-
strength, which have been correlated
prepubescent and adolescent partici-
quately and appropriately trained staff
to 1RM strength may be used (32).
pants who participate in age-specific
to properly keep and maintain such
Attention to NSCA-prescribed guide-
training (12,32,33). However, it is
records.
lines (7,14,25) for lifting technique
importantfortheStrengthandCondi-
should always be followed.
tioningpractitionertotakecertainpre-
Equal opportunity and access. Fed-
cautions with children (13).
eral, state, and possibly local laws and
regulations prohibit discrimination or In a 20-year retrospective review of Supplements, ergogenic aids and
unequal treatment (e.g., according to weight training injuries that were drugs.Theissueofusingergogenicaids,
race, color, national origin, religion, evaluated and/or treated in U.S. hos- including nutritional supplements and
sex, gender identity and expression, pital emergency departments (based drugs, is complicated by several factors.
political affiliation, age, disability, vet- on NEISS data), Jones (26) found an First, dietary supplements are regulated
eran status, genetic information, or alarming incidence of injuries to as foods rather than drugs according to
sexual orientation or other such legal young children. Children ,7 years the Dietary Supplement Health and
classifications) in most organizations, of age are almost 6 times more likely Education Act of 1994. Consequently,
institutions,andprofessions.Forexam- to be injured than those .15 years of concerns exist regarding quality con-
ple,practitionersemployedinfederally age,withthemajority(80%)resulting trol/assurance and possible consequen-
funded educational (i.e., collegiate or from playing with or around weight ces for consumers can exist. Strength
scholastic) settings must comply with training equipment in the home. The andConditioningpractitionersareoften
civil rights statutes including Title IX CPSCestimatedin2015that approx- approached for advice on nutrition and
of the Education Amendments of imately8,850childrenyoungerthan5 supplementation but may be limited
1972, which mandates gender equity yearsare injuredeachyearwithexer- through state laws in what advice can
in providing opportunity and access cise equipment (e.g., include station- be administered. Spano (55) outlines
to athletic facilities, programs, and ary bicycles, treadmills, and stair therolesandresponsibilitiesoftheSport
services. The Strength and Condition- climbers), with an additional 45,725 Nutritionistandotherprofessionalswho
ing professional must obey the letter injuriesperyeartochildren5–14years maygivenutritionadvice.However,the
and spirit of these laws when working of age (https://origin.prod.cpsc.gov/ Strength and Conditioning practitioner
withparticipantsaswellaswithstaff.If s3fs-public/2015%20Neiss%20data% shouldbeawareofthefollowing:
8
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 9 ---
(cid:1)
The Federal Trade Commission has toassistcoachesandathletesinensur- of qualifiedstaffing infulfilling thein-
primaryresponsibilityforadvertising ing they are avoiding all banned sub- stitution’s and Strength and Condi-
claims.Simplystated,advertisingfor stances, in addition to those provided tioning professional’s shared legal
any product, including dietary sup- by a specific sport governing body. dutiesforsafety,supervision,andstan-
plements, must be truthful, substan- dard of care.
The National Federation of State High
tiated, and not misleading.
School Associations’ Sports Medicine
(cid:1)
The U.S. Food and Drug Adminis- Advisory Committee is opposed to the Collegiate settings. Year-round
trationhasprimaryresponsibilityfor
use of dietary supplements to obtain strength and conditioning activities
product labelingclaims. Thelegisla- acompetitiveadvantageandhascreated arenowtheruleratherthantheexcep-
tionenforcedbythisagencyincludes a position statement to that effect tion in collegiate athletic programs.
currentgoodmanufacturingpractice (http://www.nfhs.org/media/1015652/ According to NCAA data on
regulations and selected portions of dietary-supplements-position-statement- student-athlete participation (40), the
the Federal Food, Drug and Cos- 2015.pdf Accessed 11/5/2017). Further- overall number of participants
metic Act related to dietary supple- more, Strength and Conditioning increased 108% (from 231,445 to
ments. Note that the U.S. practitioners at NCAA member institu- 482,533) between 1981–82 and 2014–
Pharmacopeia and National Formu- tions need to be aware of NCAA Divi- 15. Of special interest are the changes
lary, which establishes manufactur- sion I Bylaw 16.5.2.g: “An institution in female participation during this
ing practices for nutritional mayprovidepermissiblenutritionalsup- period. The increase in women’s par-
supplements(i.e.,standardsforiden- plementstoastudent-athleteforthepur- ticipation was 186% (from 74,239 to
tity,strength,quality,purity,packag- poseofprovidingadditionalcaloriesand 212,474) as compared with 63% for
ing,labeling,andstorage),iscitedas electrolytes. Permissible nutritional sup- men (from 169,800 to 276,599).
aprimaryresourceinthislegislation. plements do not contain any NCAA
The total number of, and time of par-
Asecondcomplicatingfactoristhatthe bannedsubstancesandareidentifiedac-
ticipation in, athletically related activi-
boundaries between dietary supple- cording to the following classes: carbo-
ties has also expanded accordingly.
ments, drugs, and conventional foods hydrate/electrolyte drinks, energy bars,
While desirable in terms of prepara-
are unclear. This is especially problem- carbohydrate boosters, and vitamins
tion, the allowance of nontraditional
aticforcompetitiveathletesandcoaches, and minerals.” The NCAA Committee
seasons, off-season skill instruction,
becausesuchproductsmaycontainsub- onCompetitiveSafeguardsandMedical
and year-round strength and condi-
stances that are banned by 1 or more Aspects of Sports has subsequently
tioning activities increases each stu-
sportgoverningbodiesdespitetheman- developedlistsofpermissibleversusnon-
dent-athlete’s potential for injury and
ufacturer’sorvendor’suseoftermssuch permissible nutritional supplements,
liabilityexposure, aswellas thecorre-
as “herbal”, “legal”, “natural”, “organic”, although these will probably change as
sponding standard of care load placed
“safe and effective”, etc. Furthermore, themarketcontinuestoevolveandnew
on support staff. The NATA recently
supplementmanufacturersareconstantly productsareevaluated.
publishedadetailedoverviewofinjury
developing new products with different
incidence in collegiate athletics, and
combinations of ingredients, making it INJURYTRENDS,LITIGATIONS,
foundthatithasrisensharplyandcon-
more challenging to identify those that ANDSTANDARDOFCARELOAD: sistently with the increase in partici-
EFFECTSOFRISINGATHLETIC
maybeproblematic. pants and exposures (39). The
PARTICIPATION
Athirdfactoristhatbannedsubstance The lack of qualified instruction and potential liability issues for Strength
policiesandprocedures,testingproto- supervision can be identified, either and Conditioning professionals and
cols, and related rules and regulations directlyorindirectly,asacausativefac- their employers are further com-
differamongsportgoverningbodiesat tor in the available information on in- pounded by the exponential rise in
all levels (e.g., USOC, MLB, NBA, juries and litigations associated with femaleparticipationandlaws mandat-
NFL, NHL, NCAA, NAIA, NFHS). weight training. In some cases, this is ing equal opportunity and access to
Therefore,acompoundthatispermis- clearly documented (26,29), while in athletic programs, services, and facili-
sible according to 1 governing body others it can be inferred. For example, ties (refer to standard 7).
may be impermissible according to the relatively high coach-to-athlete
another.TheUSAnti-DopingAgency ratio (and corresponding standard of Scholasticsettings.Thesheernumber
(USADA; https://www.usada.org/ care)inOlympic-styleweightliftingis of high school athletes, and growing
about/ Accessed 11/5/2017) and alikelyreasonforthelowincidenceof emphasis on year-round strength and
the World Anti-Doping Agency (WA- injuryinthissportdespiteitstechnical conditioningactivitiesinscholasticset-
DA; https://www.wada-ama.org/Ac- and athletic nature (18,29). Based on tings,presentsatremendouschallenge
cessed 11/5/2017) have many the collective information summa- in terms of demand for standard of
resources including lists, handbooks, rized below, it is difficult to overem- care,andaccompanyingliabilityexpo-
overviews,guides,andFAQwebpages phasize the fundamental importance sure. Student-athlete participation in
9
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 10 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
organizedhighschoolsportsincreased inflammation. Injury rates were calcu- AOASM Pre-participation Physical
100%(fromapproximately4millionto lated to be 0.33 per 100 hours of Evaluation Task Force (46), the AHA
approximately8million)between1971 weightliftingexposure,andtherecom- andACSM(3,35,36),aswellasrelevant
and 2016 (41). Of special interest are mended number of training days governing bodies and/or their constitu-
the changes in female participation missed for most (90.5%) injuries was ent members (e.g., NCAA/NAIA (44)
during this period. The relative 1 day. These authors concluded that for collegiate athletes; state legislatures,
increase in girls’ participation was weightlifting injury patterns and rates or individual state high school athletic
1,000% (from about 0.3 million to 3.3 are similar to those reported for other associations/districts for scholastic ath-
million) as compared with 24% for sports and activities. More recently, letes).Inthecollegiateathleticsenviron-
boys (from approximately 3.7 million Keogh and Winwood (29) compiled ment, the Athletic Training staff is
to 4.5 million). data from several investigations and involved in this process in accordance
found that bodybuilding had the low- with NATA guidelines. In recreational
Asisthecaseincollegiatesettings,the
est injury rates (0.024 injuries per 100 activity programs, Strength and Condi-
combination of increasing participa-
hours), with strongman (0.53 injuries tioningprofessionalsmustrequirepartic-
tioninathleticactivities,acorrespond-
per 100 hours) and Highland Games ipants to undergo preparticipation
ingriseinliabilityexposures,andlaws
(0.75 injuries per 100 hours) reporting screening and clearance in accordance
mandating equal opportunity and
the highest rates. The shoulder, lower with AHA and ACSM recommenda-
access creates a remarkable standard
back, knee, elbow, and wrist/hand tions (3,35,36). For children, the clear-
of care load and challenge in terms of
were generally the most commonly ance decision must include
legal duties for Strength and Condi-
injured anatomical locations; strains, a determination or certification than
tioningpractitionersandtheiremploy-
tendinitis, and sprains were the most thechildhasreachedalevelofmaturity
ers (refer to standard 7).
common injury type (29,38). Very few allowing participation in such activities
significant differences in any of the as addressed in the “Participation in
Other populations. Studies examining injury outcomes were observed as Strength and Conditioning Activities
the incidence and types of weight afunctionofage,sex,competitivestan- by Children” standards statement (refer
training injury report varying injury dard, or bodyweight class, although toguideline8).
rates,butsimilardistributionsofinjury Myer (38) found a higher incidence
types.Weighttraininginjuriesseemto of “accidental” injuries in youth versus GUIDELINE1.1
be associated with various training adults. Strength and Conditioning professio-
methods(e.g.,bodybuilding,powerlift- nals should cooperate and communi-
Although risk-factor studies of acute
ing, Olympic-style weightlifting, fit- cate with each of a training
weight training injuries are lacking,
ness/recreational weight training) and participant’s health care providers
recognized contributing factors
equipment (e.g., free weights, ma- andprovideserviceintheparticipant’s
include poor technique, lack of super-
chines). Of these, explosive types of best interest according to instructions
vision,skeletalimmaturity,andsteroid
training and free-weight apparatus are specified by such providers.
abuse (37). Some of these factors are
often incorrectly believed to be inher-
confirmed in the NSCA (33) and
PERSONNELQUALIFICATIONS
ently more dangerous than other
ACSM (12) published statements on
methods.Insomeoftheearliestinves- youth resistance training. Chronic GUIDELINE2.1
tigations,Hamill(18)conductedasur- weighttraininginjuries,however,have TheStrengthandConditioningpracti-
vey of sport injury rates in 13– been attributed to excessive weight tioner should acquire a minimum of
16-year-oldschoolchildrenandfound training and improper training techni- a bachelor’s or master’s degree from
that the injury rate in Olympic-style ques (52,53,61). Each of these factors anaccreditedcollegeoruniversity(ver-
weightlifting (0.0017 per 100 hours) is canbepositivelyinfluencedwithqual- ification by transcript or degree copy)
even lower than that for weight train- ified instruction and supervision. inoneormoreofthetopicscomprising
ing (0.0035 per 100 hours) and that the “Scientific Foundations” domain
each of these injury rates were much identified in the Certified Strength
PREPARTICIPATION SCREENING
lower than those observed for other, and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS)
ANDCLEARANCE
more popular sports (e.g., basketball Examination Content Description
0.03; football 0.10; gymnastics 0.044; STANDARD1.1 (42) (see Appendix 1), or in a related
athletics 0.57). Calhoon and Fry (6) StrengthandConditioningprofessio- subject area. An ongoing effort should
analyzed weightlifting injury reports nals can only work with participants alsobemadetoacquireknowledgeand
at the U.S. Olympic Training Centers who have undergone health care skills in the other content areas.
over a 6-year period and found that provider screening and clearance be-
eliteweightlifters’injurieswerestrains, fore participation, in accordance GUIDELINE2.2
tendinitis, or sprains typical of acute with instructions specified by the TheStrengthandConditioningpracti-
(59.6%) or chronic (30.4%) overuse or AAFP-AAP-ACSM-AMSSM-AOSSM- tioner should achieve and maintain
10
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 11 ---
professional certification(s) with con- participants performing activities in STANDARD4.2
tinuing education requirements and which free weights are supported on Before being put into service, all exer-
a code of ethics, such as the CSCS thetrunkormovedoverthehead/face cise devices, machines, and free
credential offered through the NSCA (7,14). weights must be thoroughly inspected
(see Appendix 2). Depending on the andtestedbyStrengthandCondition-
practitioner’s scope of activities, ing professionals to ensure they are
GUIDELINE3.1
responsibilities, and knowledge re- working and performing properly and
Strength and conditioning activities
quirements, related certifications as intended by the manufacturer.
should be planned, and the requisite
offered by other governing bodies
number of qualified staff (refer to
may also be appropriate. STANDARD4.3
guideline2)shouldbeavailablesuch
Exercise machines, equipment, and
that recommended guidelines
GUIDELINE2.3 free weights must be inspected and
for minimum average floor space
The productivity of a Strength and maintained at intervals specified by
allowance per participant (100
Conditioning staff member, as well as manufacturers. In the absence of such
ft2), minimum professional-to-
learningandskilldevelopmentofindi- specifications,theseitemsmustbereg-
participant ratios (1:10 or lower
vidual members, should be enhanced ularly inspected and maintained ac-
junior high school, 1:15 or lower
by aligning a performance team com- cording to a schedule determined by
high school, 1:20 or lower college),
posed of qualified practitioners with the Strength and Conditioning practi-
and number of participants per bar-
interdependent expertise and shared tioner based on their knowledge and
bell or training station (3) are
leadership roles (see Appendix 3). experience.
achieved during peak usage times
Oncetheteamisassembled,respective
(23,56). Younger participants, novi- STANDARD4.4
activities and responsibilities from the
ces, special populations, or partici- Exercise devices, machines, equip-
domains identified in the Certified
pants engaged in complex- ment,andfreeweightsthatareinneed
Strength and Conditioning Specialist
movementstrengthandconditioning of repair, as determined by regular
(CSCS)ExaminationContentDescrip-
activities should be provided with inspection or as reported by users,
tion (42) (see Appendix 1), as well as
greatersupervision(e.g.,1:12instead must be immediately removed from
appropriateliaisonassignments,should
of1:20;refertoguideline8).Strength use until serviced and repaired and be
be delegated according to each mem-
and Conditioning practitioners and re-inspected and tested to ensure that
ber’s particular expertise.
their employers should work theyareworkingproperlybeforebeing
PROGRAMSUPERVISION AND together toward a long-term goal returnedtoservice.Ifsuchdevicesare
INSTRUCTION of matching the professional-to- involved in incidents of injury, legal
participant ratio in the Strength and advisorsorriskmanagersmustbecon-
STANDARD3.1
Conditioning facility to each sport’s sulted for advice before service/repair
Strength and conditioning programs
respective coach-to-athlete ratio or destruction.
must provide adequate and appropri-
(refer to Appendix 6).
ate supervision by well-qualified and
GUIDELINE4.1
trained personnel, especially during
Strength and Conditioning professio-
FACILITYANDEQUIPMENTSET-
peakusagetimes.Toensuremaximum
nalsandtheiremployersshouldensure
UP,INSPECTION,MAINTENANCE,
health,safety,andinstruction,Strength
REPAIRANDSIGNAGE that facilities are appropriate for
and Conditioning professionals must
strength and conditioning activities.
be physically and mentally present STANDARD4.1
Factors to be reviewed and approved
during strength and conditioning Exercisedevices,machines,andequip-
beforeactivityinclude,butarenotlim-
activities, have a clear view of the ment, including free weights, must be
ited to, floor surface, lighting, room
entire facility (or at least the zone assembled,setup, andplaced inactiv-
temperature and air exchange (24).
being supervised by each practitioner) ity areas in full accordance with man-
andtheparticipantsinit,bephysically ufacturer’sinstructions,tolerances,and GUIDELINE4.2
closeenoughtotheparticipantsunder recommendations and with accompa- Manufacturer-provideduser’smanuals,
their supervision to be able to see and nying safety signage, instruction plac- warranties, and operating guides
clearly communicate with them, and ards, notices, and warnings posted or should be preserved and followed
have quick access to those in need of placed according to ASTM standards (refer to guideline 6).
spotting or assistance. soastobenoticedbyusersbeforeuse.
In the absence of such information, GUIDELINE4.3
STANDARD3.2 professionals must complete these All equipment, including free weights,
Inconjunctionwith appropriatesafety tasks in accordance with authoritative should be cleaned and/or disinfected
equipment (e.g., power racks), atten- information available from other as recommended by the manufacturer
tive spotting must be provided for sources. and/or OSHA. Users should be
11
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 12 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
directed to wipe down skin-contact necessary emergency care equipment in accordance with all laws, regula-
surfaces after each use. on-site that is quickly accessible; and tions, and requirements, mandating
a thorough understanding of the per- equal opportunity, access, and non-
EMERGENCYPLANNING AND sonnelandproceduresassociatedwith discrimination. Such federal, state,
RESPONSE
the plan by all individuals (refer to and possibly local laws and regula-
STANDARD5.1 Appendix 7). tionsapplytomostorganizations,in-
Strength and Conditioning professio- stitutions, and professionals.
nals must be trained and certified in RECORDSANDRECORD KEEPING Discrimination or unequal treatment
currentguidelinesforCPRestablished based on race, color, national origin,
GUIDELINE6.1
by AHA/ILCOR (1). Training in uni- religion, sex, gender identity and
In conjunction with written policies
versal precautions for preventing dis- expression, political affiliation, age,
and procedures, Strength and Condi-
ease transmission established by the disability, veteran status, genetic
tioning professionals should develop
CDC (51) and OSHA (43) is required information or sexual orientation, or
andmaintainvariousrecordsincluding
ifpersonnelarenotimmediatelyavail- othersuchlegalclassificationsisgen-
manufacturer-provideduser’smanuals,
abletoproperlyrespondtoexposureto erally prohibited.
warranties, and operating guides;
blood or other potentially infectious
equipmentselection,purchase,installa-
materials. First Aid training/certifica-
tion,set-up,inspection,cleaning,main- GUIDELINE7.1
tion is also necessary if Sports Medi-
tenance, and repair records; personnel IfaStrengthandConditioning profes-
cine personnel (e.g., MD or ATC) are
credentials;professional standards and sional witnesses any discriminatory or
not immediately available during
guidelines; safety policies and proce- unequaltreatmentofindividuals while
strength and conditioning activities.
dures, including a written emergency performing duties in the scope of
Newstaffengagedinstrengthandcon-
response plan (refer to standard 5); employment, the illegal conduct must
ditioning activities must comply with
training logs, progress entries, and/or be immediately reported to a supervi-
this standard within 6 months of
activity instruction/supervision notes; sor, compliance department, and/or
employment.
andinjury/incidentreports,prepartici- the general counsel for the employ-
pationmedicalclearance,andreturnto ment entity. To protect the interests
STANDARD5.2
participationclearancedocuments.All oftheStrengthandConditioningpro-
Strength and Conditioning professio-
records should be kept as securely as fessional, it is also recommended to
nals must develop a written, venue-
possible,withlimitedaccessbyanyone consult with a private legal counsel
specific emergency response plan to
not on staff. Examples of securing re- when the foregoing situation is
deal with incidents such as injuries,
cordsincludelockedfilingcabinetsand encountered.
lightning strikes, and reasonably fore-
password-protected computers and
seeable untoward events within each
computer files. In settings where par- PARTICIPATIONINSTRENGTHAND
facility. The plan must be posted at
ticipants arenot otherwiserequiredto CONDITIONINGACTIVITIES BY
strategic areas within each facility
sign protective legal documents (e.g., CHILDREN
and practiced at least quarterly. The
informedconsent,agreementtopartic-
emergency response plan must be ini- GUIDELINE8.1
ipate,waiver;refertoAppendix8)cov-
tially evaluated (e.g., by facility risk Children younger than 7 years should
ering all athletically related activities,
managers, legal advisors, medical pro- notbepermittedtoengageinstrength
the Strength and Conditioning profes-
viders, and/or off-premise emergency and conditioning activities with free
sional should have such legal docu-
response agencies) and modified as weights or exercise devices/machines
ments prepared by an appropriate
necessary at regular intervals. As part in facilities designed for use by adults
professional, for participants under
of the plan, a readily accessible and and adolescents and should be denied
his/her supervision. These records
working telephone must be immedi- access to such training areas. Other
should be preserved and maintained
ately available to summon on-premise forms of strength and conditioning
foraperioddeterminedbytheinstitu-
and/or off-premise emergency activities may be beneficial for such
tionwherethefacilityishousedorpro-
response resources. children,andshouldberecommended
fessionallegaladviceandconsultation.
accordingtotheestablishedguidelines
GUIDELINE5.1 (12,32,33),andwithagreaterdegreeof
EQUAL OPPORTUNITYAND
The components of a written and instruction and supervision than that
ACCESS
posted emergency response plan supplied to adolescents and adults.
should include access to a physician STANDARD7.1 Childrenparticipatinginsuchactivities
and/or emergency medical facility StrengthandConditioningprofessio- should be cleared as specified in the
when warranted; communication and nals and their employers must pro- NSCA’s “Standard for Pre-
transportation between the venue and vide facilities, training, programs, participationScreeningandClearance”
the medical facility; appropriate and services, and related opportunities (refer to standard 1).
12
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 13 ---
GUIDELINE8.2 supplements that are illegal, pro- The 1996 CSCS Job Analysis
Children between 7 and 14 years of hibited, or harmful to participants study evaluated the results of a ques-
age who have reached a level of physi- for any purpose including enhancing tionnaire sent to randomly selected
cal, emotional, and intellectual maturity athleticperformance,conditioning,or NSCA members who were CSCS-
allowing participation in specified physique. Only those substances that certifiedasofOctober1996.Respond-
strength and conditioning activities, as arelawful(viathird-partytesting)and ents were asked to assign an impor-
tance to 112 tasks that a CSCS
determined and certified by their medi- have been scientifically proven to be
typically performs on the job. From
calcareprovider(orbytheStrengthand beneficial,oratleastnotharmful,may
these data, the NSCA Certification
Conditioningprofessionalactingincon- be recommended to participants by
Commission’s CSCS Job Analysis
certwithachild’smedicalcareprovider), Strength and Conditioning professio-
Committee determined the inclusion
and after clearance for participation as nals,andonlytoindividualsage18or
criteria of the tasks (5 of the original
specified in the NSCA’s “Standard for above and not in an individualized
112 were excluded), the distribution
Pre-participation Screening and Clear- manner.
oftaskswithineachCSCSexamination
ance” (refer to standard 1), should be
domain and its subcategories, as well
individually assessed by the Strength APPENDIX1.STRENGTH AND
asdistributionoftheexaminationques-
and Conditioning professional in con- CONDITIONINGPRACTITIONER
tion type (i.e., recall, application, and
DEFINITION
junction with the child’s parent(s)/ analysis) within each domain and its
guardian(s)/custodian(s) to determine In1996,2004,andagainin2012, subcategories. The document result-
the NSCA Certification Commission
whether such children may engage in ingfromtheCSCSJobAnalysisstudy
(changed to Certification Committee in
such activities in areas containing free is the “CSCS Examination Content
2008) and its examination service con-
weights and exercise devices/machines Outline,” which forms the basis for
ductedaJobAnalysisstudywiththepur-
generally used by adults and older chil- the Certified Strength and Condition-
pose of surveying the activities,
dren. If so permitted, such activities ing Specialist (CSCS) Examination
responsibilities, and knowledge require-
should be developed and implemented Content Description(42),anexamina-
mentsofaCertifiedStrengthandCondi-
according to established guidelines tion preparation resource available
tioning Specialist (CSCS). The results
(12,32,33) and with a greater degree of through the NSCA. The 2004 ques-
were used to describe the job activities
instruction and supervision than that tionnaire was sent to certified individ-
oftheCSCSinsufficientdetailtoprovide
suppliedtoadolescentsandadults. ualsandthenewresultswereusedto
a basis for the development of a profes-
change the format of the examination,
sional,job-relatedcertificationexamination
GUIDELINE8.3 with more emphasis placed on the
that will certify strength and conditioning
Children who are 14 years of age and practical/appliedsection.In2012,sur-
specialists as competent professionals.
vey data results were reviewed by the
older, according to the Strength and Anearlystepintheprocesswastocreate
CSCS Job Analysis Committee and
Conditioning practitioner’s profes- a “practitioner” definition. Essentially, this
decisionruleswereestablished.These
sional judgment, have reached a level definition is a job description that estab-
rules were used to determine which
ofphysical,emotional,andintellectual lishesthelegalandprofessionalscopeof
taskswereappropriateforassessment
maturity, allowing them to engage in practice of the appropriate activities of
and inclusion in the final test content
specified Strength and Conditioning aCSCS(refertoAppendix2):
outline.
activities (provided they have been Certified Strength and Condi-
granted parental consent and been tioning Specialists are professionals
cleared for participation as specified who apply foundational knowledge in CSCSEXAMINATION CONTENT
in the NSCA’s “Standard for Pre- a practical setting to assess, moti- OUTLINE
participation Screening and Clear- vate, educate, and train athletes for Adapted from: Certified Strength
ance”;refertostandard1),mayengage the primary goal of improving sport and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS)
performance. They conduct general ExaminationContent Description (42)
in such activities in areas containing
physical and sport-specific testing
free weights and exercise devices/ma-
sessions, design and implement safe
chines generally used by adults and Scientific foundations
and effective strength training and
with a greater degree of instruction
conditioning programs, and provide
and supervision than that supplied to I. Exercise Sciences (59 questions)
guidance for athletes in nutrition and
adult populations while training. A. Apply knowledge of muscle
injury prevention. Recognizing their
anatomy and physiology.
area of expertise is separate and dis-
SUPPLEMENTS,ERGOGENICAIDS,
tinct from the medical, dietetic, ath- B. Apply knowledge of neuromus-
ANDDRUGS
letic training, and sport coaching cular anatomy and physiology.
STANDARD9.1 fields; Certified Strength and Condi- C. Apply knowledge of basic prin-
StrengthandConditioningprofessionals tioning Specialists consult with and ciplesofbiomechanicsregarding
must not prescribe, recommend, or refer athletes to these professionals exerciseselection,execution,and
provide drugs, controlled substances or when appropriate. sport performance.
13
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 14 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
D. Apply knowledge of bone and F. Teach and evaluate flexibility A. Select and administer tests to
connective tissue (tendons and exercise technique. maximize test reliability and
ligaments) anatomy and G. Teach spotting procedures and validity.
physiology. techniques. B.Administertestprotocolsandpro-
E. Apply knowledge of bioenerget- II. Program Design (39 questions) cedures to ensure reliable data
ics and metabolism. Based on an athlete’s health sta- collection.
F. Apply knowledge of neuroendo- tus, training age, capabilities, and train- C.Evaluateandinterprettestresults.
crine physiology. inggoals,designtrainingprogramsthat V.New“untried”questions(15non-
G.Applyknowledgeofcardiopulmo- maximize performance and minimize scored questions)
naryanatomyandphysiology. injury potentialby
H.Apply knowledgeof physiologi- A. Incorporating various training APPENDIX 2.CERTIFIED
cal adaptations to exercise and methods and modes. STRENGTH ANDCONDITIONING
training. B. Selecting exercises. SPECIALIST (CSCS)PROGRAM
I. Apply knowledge ofthe anatom- C. Applying the principles of exer- The CSCS program was initi-
ical, physiological, and biome- cise order. ated in 1985 to identify individuals
chanical differences of athletes D. Determining and assigning exer- whopossesstheknowledgeandskills
(e.g.,age,sex,trainingstatus,spe- cise intensities (e.g., load, resis- to design and implement safe and
effective strength and conditioning
cific sport or activity). tance,heartrate).
programs. This certification program
J. Apply knowledge of psychologi- E.Determiningandassigningtraining
cal techniques used to enhance volumes(definedassets3 reps). encourages a higher level of compe-
tence among practitioners, which ulti-
the training and performance. F.Determiningandassigningwork/
mately raises the quality of strength
II. Nutrition (21 questions) rest periods, recovery and un-
training and conditioning programs
A. Apply basic knowledge of nutri- loading, and training. for athletes by those who are CSCS-
tional factors affecting health G. Determining and assigning exer- certified.
andperformance. cise progression (e.g., mode, A CSCS educates and trains
B. Apply basic strategies for manipu- intensity, duration, frequency). primarily athletes in proper strength
lating food choices and training H. Applying the principles of training and conditioning practices.
methodstomaximizeperformance. periodization. StrengthandConditioningCSCSpro-
C. Recognize signs, symptoms, and I. Designing programs for an injured fessionals work in a variety of environ-
behaviors associated with eating athleteduringthereconditioningperiod ments, including high school, college,
disordersandalteredeatinghabits. (e.g., assigning exercises for a given university, and professional institu-
D. Apply basicknowledgeof the ef- injuryorconditionincollaborationwith tions, sports medicine clinics, health,
fects, risks, and alternatives of sportmedicine professionals). and fitness clubs, corporate wellness
common performance-enhancing III. Organization and Administration centers, and in professional sports.
substancesandmethods. (13 questions) Competencies assessed intheCSCS
III. New “untried” questions (15 non- A.Determinethedesign,layout,and examination are determined through
scored questions) organization of the strength and a Job Analysis conducted by an inde-
conditioningfacility(e.g.,flooring, pendent professional examination ser-
Practical/applied ceiling height, mirror placement, vice based on input from current
Strength and Conditioning professio-
ventilation,lighting,characteristics
nals.Everystepintheprocessleading
I. Exercise Technique (38 questions) of the equipment) based on ath-
to the development of valid certifica-
A. Teach and evaluate resistance leticneedsandindustrystandards.
tion examinations meets the stringent
training exercise technique. B.Determinetheprimarydutiesand
guidelinesoftheNationalCommission
B. Teach and evaluate plyometric responsibilities of the members of
forCertifyingAgencies(NCCA).Pass/
exercise technique. thestrengthandconditioningstaff.
fail rates and reliability statistics are
C.Teachandevaluatespeed/sprint C. Determine the policies and pro-
published annually.
technique(e.g.,resistedandassis- cedures associated with the
Writersoftheexaminationsinclude
ted sprinting, speed-strength). operation of the strength and
renownedpractitioners,researchers,edu-
D. Teach and evaluate agility tech- conditioning facility (e.g., facil-
cators, and psychometricians. Although
nique (e.g., forward, backward, ity/equipment cleaning and there are many certification programs
andlateralmovements;turn,tran- maintenance, rules, scheduling, associated with physical training, the
sition, acceleration, and decelera- emergency procedures). CSCS certification examination program
tionmaneuvers). D. Create a safe training environ- is 1 of only 2 that have been specifically
E.Teachandevaluatemetaboliccon- ment within the strength and designed to assess the competencies of
ditioning/energy systems conditioning facility. those who strength train and condition
development. IV.TestingandEvaluation(20questions) athletes.
14
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 15 ---
ACCREDITATION Foundations”, consists of 80 scored The NSCA is dedicated to main-
In 1993 the NSCA Certification multiple-choicequestionsintheareasof: taining a high standard for its members
(cid:1)
Commission certification program Exercise Sciences (Anatomy, Exer- and certificants. The following Code of
became the first fitness-related certifi- cise Physiology, Biomechanics, Ethics assures that CSCS and NSCA-
cation accredited by the esteemed Sport Psychology) CPTcertificantsareawareofthestand-
NCCA*. The rigorous CSCS and (cid:1) Nutrition ards of ethical behavior that should be
NSCA-Certified Personal Trainer The second section, “Practical/ followed in the practice of their
(NSCA-CPT) examinations are among Applied”, consists of 110 scored profession.
the most challenging in the industry. multiple-choice questions, 30–40 of Principle 1: Certificants shall respect
*Note:TheNCCAistheaccredita- which contain video and/or images that the rights, welfare, and dignity of all
tionbodyoftheInstituteforCredentialing assesscompetenciesinexercisetechni- individuals.
Excellence, a nonprofit nongovernment ques, functional anatomy, and testing 1.1. Certificants shall not discrimi-
agencythatpromotesexcellenceincom- procedureswiththeexercises,muscles, nateonthebasisofrace,color,
petencyassuranceforpractitionersinall
and/orjointsshown.Theareascovered national origin, religion, sex,
occupationsandprofessions.TheNCCA
include: genderidentityandexpression,
measures the ability of certifying organi- (cid:1)
Exercise Technique political affiliation, age, disabil-
zations in any industry to accurately (cid:1)
Program Design ity,veteranstatus,geneticinfor-
discriminate between qualified and (cid:1)
Organization and Administration mationorsexualorientation,or
unqualifiedprofessionals.ToearnNCCA (cid:1)
Testing and Evaluation other such legal classifications.
recognition, a credentialing body must
1.2. Certificants shall provide com-
demonstrate an ability to develop and
petent,fair,andequaltreatment
administerpsychometricallysoundexami-
CONTINUINGEDUCATION to all individuals.
nationsthateffectivelydifferentiatequali-
PROGRAM
fication level through a series of criteria, 1.3. Certificants shall preserve the
Thepurposeofhavingcontinuing
including: confidentiality of personal and
(cid:1) Thecertifyingorganizationisrespon- education as part of a certification pro- privileged information of the
gramistoencouragecertificantstostay
sibleforalldecisionspertainingtocer- athlete, client, or the NSCA.
abreastofevolvingknowledgeandskills
tificationandrecertification(including, 1.4.Certificantsshallnotreleaseany
in the profession, and, in doing so, to
but not limited to, examination con- informationtoathirdpartynot
promote the ongoing competency of
tent,eligibilityrequirements,grievance involved with the athlete’s or
those who are certified. The NSCA re-
and disciplinary policies, setting fees, client’s care without a written
quires each certificant to do the follow-
programoperation,etc.)withoutbeing release unless required by law.
ingtoremaincertified:
subjecttoapprovalbyanyotherbody. (cid:1) Principle 2: Certificants shall comply
Complete 6 continuing education
(cid:1) The examination is developed from withallapplicablestate,localandfed-
units (CEUs) or a prorated amount
a Job Analysis study. eral laws, and NSCA Bylaws, policies,
ofCEUsifcertifiedwithinthe3-year
(cid:1) Pass/failratesandreliabilitystatistics and procedures.
reporting period.
are a matter of public record. (cid:1) 2.1. Certificants shall comply with
Maintain current CPR certification.
(cid:1) Examination development involves (cid:1) all institutional guidelines.
SubmitacompletedCEUReporting
qualifiedprofessionals,suchascontent 2.2. Certificants shall comply with
Form and recertification fee.
experts and psychometricians with (cid:1) all copyright laws.
Maintaindocumentationofactivities
expertiseinexaminationdevelopment. 2.3. Certificants shall be familiar
listed on the CEU Reporting Form.
Accreditationforprofessionalor withandfollowtheNSCABy-
The NSCA is committed to certi-
personnel certification programs pro- lawsandallapplicablepolicies,
fying individuals who demonstrate the
vides impartial, third-party validation procedures, rules, standards
knowledge and skills necessary to
that the program has met recognized and guidelines.
designandimplementsafeandeffective
nationalandinternationalcredentialing 2.4. Certificants shall not condone
strength training and conditioning and
industry standards for development, or engage in any illegal or
personal training practices. With the
implementation, and maintenance of unethical behavior.
credibility possessed by the CSCS
certification programs.
and NSCA-CPT examinations comes Principle 3: Certificants shall maintain
the responsibility to ensure the integrity and promote high standards.
CSCSEXAMINATION FORMAT of the credentials awarded. This philos- 3.1. Certificants shall not misrepre-
ToearntheCSCScredential,can- ophyimpliesthattheresponsibilityofits sent, either directly or indi-
didatesmustpassarigorousexamination certificants is not limited to the well- rectly, their skills, training,
that consists of 2 sections. A candidate being of the athletes and/or clients, professional credentials, iden-
must pass both sections to be CSCS- andthereputationofothersintheirfield; tity, or services.
certified (and may retake any section not with the overall goal being an improve- 3.2. Certificants shall only provide
passed).Thefirstsection,called“Scientific mentofhealth andwell-being forall. services they are qualified to
15
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 16 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
(cid:1)
provide through education or seek rehabilitation for chemi- Expectations and goals are high but
experience and which are al- cal dependency. achievable,andperformanceevalua-
lowed by practice acts and Certificants should also strive to safe- tion is based on results.
other pertinent regulations. guard the public by reporting viola- (cid:1) Rolesareinterdependent;leadershipis
3.3.Certificantsshallreferathleteor tions of this Code of Ethics. shared;abilities,experiences,expertise,
client to more qualified fitness, knowledge,skills,andtalentsarecom-
plementary; contribution, participa-
medical, or health care profes- APPENDIX 3.STRENGTH AND
sional when appropriate. CONDITIONING PERFORMANCE tion,andinfluencearebalanced.
(cid:1)
3.4.Certificantswhoareresearchers TEAM DEVELOPMENT Effective task performance is facili-
or educators shall maintain Teams are preferable to single- tatedbyencouragingandrewarding
and promote ethical conduct leader groups when there is a need for creativity,innovation,andrisktaking
in research and educational collective work products (i.e., multiple in all decision making or problem
activities. skills, judgments, and experiences) by solving activities.
3.5.Certificantsshouldstrivetocon- members working together in real time, Thestrengthandconditioningstaff
tinuously improve knowledge, shifting leadership roles, and mutual as can be aligned through hiring of practi-
skills, and techniques to protect well as individual accountability (27,28). tionerswithformaleducationandspecial-
theathleteorclientfrominjury. By contrast, single-leader/hierarchical ization in specific scientific foundations
work groups are appropriate when the (e.g., anatomy, exercise physiology, bio-
Principle4:Certificantsshallnotengage
sumofindependentworkers’contributions mechanics, sport psychology) (42). An
inanybehaviororformofconductthat
is adequate, singular rather than shared assembled team allows for cooperative
adverselyreflectsontheNSCA.
leadership is effective, task(s) and corre- expertise by practitioners with comple-
4.1. Certificants should conduct
spondingsolution(s)arefamiliar,workers’ mentaryskillsandprovidesaneducational
themselves personally and
skillscanbe appliedproductivelywithout opportunity for staff members to gain
professionallyinamannerthat interaction(otherthansharinginformation), knowledge outside their specialization by
does not compromise their andspeedandefficiencyhavepriorityover working with outside liaisons. The table
professional responsibility. extraperformanceresults(27,28). below provides a practical example of
4.2. Certificants shall not place Extraordinarily demanding chal- a strength and conditioning performance
financial gain above the wel- lenges are the driving forces behind team.Thedirectorofstrengthandcondi-
fare of the NCSA, athlete’s or high-performance teams. Common fea- tioning is responsible for delineating the
client’s and shall not in any turesofsuchteamsinclude (27,28): appropriate duties and responsibilities to
(cid:1)
arrangement exploit the Membersarecommittedtoaclearmis- the rest of the strength and conditioning
NSCA, athlete or client. sion,commonapproach,collaboration, staff for program design, exercise tech-
4.3. Certificants shall avoid sub- and mutual accountability and nique, organization and administration,
stance abuse and, if necessary, responsibility. andtestingandevaluation(56).
Scientificfoundationseducation/Expertise Practicalandappliedactivities/Responsibilities Liaisonassignment(s)
Exercise/sportanatomy;biomechanics Exercisetechnique;testingand evaluation; Exercise/sportscientist; team
rehabilitationand reconditioning coaches;sportsmedicineteam
Exercise/sportphysiology Programdesign;testingandevaluation Exercise/sportscientist; team
coaches
Exercise/sportnutrition Nutrition Exercise/sportscientist; sport
nutritionist/dietitian
Exercise/sportpedagogy Programdesign;exercisetechnique; Exercise/sportscientist; team
organizationand administration coaches;athletic
administration
Exercise/sportpsychology;motor learning Exercisetechnique;rehabilitationand Exercise/scientist; sports
reconditioning medicineteam;teamcoaches
Trainingmethodology Programdesign;organizationand Exercise/sportscientist; team
administration coaches;athletic
administration
Kinesiology;physiotherapy;sports Rehabilitationandreconditioning Sportsmedicineteam
medicine
16
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 17 ---
Area Examples Formula
Proneandsupine Benchpress;lying Actual weightbenchlength(6–8ft)+safety spacecushionof3ftmultiplied by
exercises tricepsextension suggesteduserspaceforweightbenchwidthof7ft+safetyspacecushionof3ft.
Example:Ifusinga6ftlongweightbenchforthebenchpressexercise(6ft+3ft)
3(7ft+3ft)590ft(2)
Standing Bicepscurl; upright Actualbarlength(4–7ft)+double-widesafetyspacecushionof6ftmultipliedby
exercises row suggesteduserspaceforstandingexercisewidthof4ft.Example:Ifusinga4ft
curlbar for the bicepscurlexercise(4ft+6ft)3(4ft)540ft(2)
Standing Back squat;shoulder Actualbarlength(5–7ft)+double-widesafetyspacecushionof6ftmultipliedby
exercisesin press suggesteduserspaceforstandingexerciseinarackwidthof8–10ft.Example:If
arack usinga7ft.Olympicbarforthebacksquatexercise(7ft+6ft)3(10ft)5130ft(2)
Olympic lifting Powerclean Liftingplatformlength(typically8ft)+perimeterwalkwaysafetyspacecushionof4
area ftmultipliedbyliftingplatformwidth(typically8ft)+perimeter walkwaysafety
spacecushionof4ft.Example: (8ft+4ft)3(8ft+4ft)5144 ft(2)
APPENDIX4.STRENGTH AND Androgen and Human Growth Hor- EMERGENCYCAREAND
CONDITIONINGFACILITY mone Use—2009 COVERAGE
SCHEDULING Youth Resistance Training—2009 Reasonableattention toallpossi-
ble preventive measures will not elimi-
TABLED1.CALCULATIONSFOR
SPACENEEDS(24) nate sports injuries. Each scheduled
APPENDIX6.NCAADIVISION I
practice or contest of an institution-
ATHLETE-TO-COACH RATIOS
Note:Manyfacilitiesusecombina- sponsored intercollegiate athletics
tion platforms and racks (multi-purpose TABLEF1:NCAADIVISIONI event, as well as out-of-season practi-
OVERALLCHAMPIONSHIP
training stations) as a way to save ces and skills sessions, should include
SPORTSPARTICIPATION(2014–15)
space and allow participants to com- anemergencyplan.Likestudent-athlete
ANDRESULTINGATHLETE-TO-
plete several exercises in 1 location. welfare in general, a plan is a shared
COACHRATIOS,ASTHEONLY
Accordingly, the standing rack and DIVISIONWITHLIMITATIONSON responsibility of the athletics depart-
Olympicliftingareacalculationsabove NUMBEROFCOACHES(NCAA ment; administrators, coaches; and
should be combined. DIVISIONIMANUAL,BYLAW11.7) medical personnelshouldallplay arole
(40) in the establishment of the plan, pro-
APPENDIX5.STRENGTH AND curementofresources;andunderstand-
CONDITIONINGTRAININGPLAN
ing by all parties. Components of such
DEVELOPMENT TABLEF2:NCAADIVISIONIMEN’S aplanshouldinclude
A detailed discussion of devel- CHAMPIONSHIPSPORTS
1. The presence of a person qualified
oping a Strength and Conditioning PARTICIPATION(2014–15)AND
and delegated to render emergency
training plan is beyond the scope of RESULTINGATHLETE-TO-COACH
thisproject.Formorespecificinforma- RATIOS,BYSPORT(40) care to a stricken participant;
2. The presence or planned access to
tion on program design, the Strength
aphysicianforpromptmedicaleval-
and Conditioning practitioner should
refer to Chapters 17–21 of Essentials TABLEF3:NCAADIVISIONI uation of the situation, when
ofStrengthTrainingandConditioning, WOMEN’SCHAMPIONSHIP warranted;
4th edition (15) as well as the NSCA SPORTSPARTICIPATION(2014– 3.Plannedaccesstoearlydefibrillation;
position statements listed below. 15)ANDRESULTINGATHLETE-TO- 4. Planned access to a medical facility,
COACHRATIOS,BYSPORT(40)
NSCA Position Statements including a plan for communication
(https://www.nsca.com/nsca-tools-and- APPENDIX7.EMERGENCYCARE and transportation between the ath-
resources/); PDF files (Accessed 11/ ANDPLANNING letics site and the medical facility for
5/2017). Source: NCAA Sports Medicine prompt medical services, when war-
Long-TermAthleticDevelopment—2016 Handbook(44) ranted.Accesstoaworkingtelephone
Sport Teams Athletes Averagesquadsize Limitonno.ofcoaches Athletespercoach
Total(men+women) 6,475 175,952 112
Average(39 sports) 27.2 2.9 9.5
17
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 18 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
Sport Teams Athletes Averagesquadsize Limitonno.ofcoaches Athletespercoach
Baseball 295 10,396 35.2 3 11.8
Basketball 345 5,432 15.7 4 3.9
Crosscountry 311 4,845 15.6 2 7.8
Fencing 20 383 19.2 2 9.6
Football 250 27,873 111.5 11 10.1
Golf 297 2,947 9.9 2 5.0
Gymnastics 15 304 20.3 3 6.8
Icehockey 59 1,638 27.8 3 9.3
Lacrosse 68 3,109 45.7 3 15.2
Rifle 17 131 7.7 2 3.9
Skiing 11 155 14.1 2 7.0
Soccer 200 5,738 28.7 3 9.6
Swimming/diving 134 3,839 28.6 3 9.5
Tennis 258 2,678 10.4 2 5.2
Track(indoor) 257 10,174 39.6 3 13.2
Track(outdoor) 278 11,067 39.8 3 13.3
Volleyball 21 405 19.3 3 6.4
Waterpolo 22 566 25.7 2 12.9
Wrestling 76 2,520 33.2 3 11.1
Total 2,934 94,200 59
Average(19sports) 32.1 3.1 10.4
or other telecommunications device, both on campus and while traveling 9. A member of the institution’s sports
whether fixed or mobile, should be forusebymedicalpersonnel; medicine staff should be empowered
assured; 6. An inclement weather policy that tohavetheunchallengeableauthority
5.Allnecessaryemergencyequipment includes provisions for decision to cancel or modify a workout for
should be at the site or quickly making and evacuation plans (See health and safety (i.e., environmental
accessible. Equipment should be in NCAA Guideline 1E); changes), as he or she deems
good operating condition, and per- 7.Athoroughunderstandingbyallpar- appropriate;
sonnelmustbetrainedinadvanceto ties,includingtheleadershipofvisit- 10. Institutions should ensure that the
use it properly. This equipment ing teams, of the personnel and emergency action plan incorpo-
proceduresassociatedwiththeemer- rates roles and responsibilities of
should include but is not limited
gency care plan; coaching staff, medical staff, spec-
to, an AED, a bag-valve mask,
8. Certification in CPR techniques, tators, and others during injury
advanced airway tools, a spine
first aid, and prevention of disease evaluation/response on the field,
board, and other stabilization sup-
transmission (as outlined by OSHA toensureappropriatefirstresponse
plies for the head and neck, splints,
guidelines) should be required for andmedicalevaluation.Theemer-
andbleedingcontrolmaterials,such
all athletics personnel associated gency action plan should provide
asatourniquetandlargesteriledress-
with practices, competitions, skill thatappropriatemedicalstaffhave
ings.Sportsmedicineprovidersshould instruction,andstrengthandcon- access to the injured athlete with-
be trained to use emergency equip- ditioning. New staff engaged in out interference; and
mentbeforedeployment.Inaddition, these activities should comply 11. Institutions should have on file and
emergency information about the with these rules within 6 months annually update an emergency
student-athlete should be available of employment; action plan for each athletics venue
18
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 19 ---
Sport Teams Athletes Averagesquadsize Limitonno.ofcoaches Athletespercoach
Basketball 343 4,984 14.5 4 3.6
Bowling 34 299 8.8 2 4.4
Crosscountry 342 6,031 17.6 2 8.8
Fencing 24 397 16.5 2 8.3
Fieldhockey 77 1,732 22.5 3 7.5
Golf 259 2,170 8.4 2 4.2
Gymnastics 61 1,085 17.8 3 5.9
Icehockey 35 846 24.2 3 8.4
Lacrosse 106 3,172 29.9 3 10.0
Rifle 24 151 6.3 2 3.2
Rowing 88 5,668 64.4 3 21.5
Skiing 12 175 14.6 2 7.3
Soccer 326 8,963 27.5 3 9.2
Softball 289 6,044 20.9 3 7.0
Swimming/diving 195 5,393 27.7 3 9.2
Tennis 318 2,912 9.2 2 4.6
Track(indoor) 319 12,816 40.2 3 13.4
Track(outdoor) 329 13,075 39.7 3 13.2
Volleyball 328 5,165 15.7 3 5.2
Waterpolo 32 674 21.1 2 10.5
TOTAL 3,541 81,752 53
Average(20 sports) 23.1 2.7 8.7
to respond to student-athlete cata- Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra- A. Develop a lightning safety plan for
strophicinjuriesandillnesses,includ- tion(NOOA)estimatesthat40fatalities each outdoor venue. At a minimum,
ing but not limited to, concussions, and about 10 times that many injuries the plan should include the following:
heat illness, spine injury, cardiac occur from lightning strikes every year. 1. The use of lightning safety slo-
arrest respiratory distress (e.g., NOAA estimates that as many as 62 gans to simplify and summarize
asthma),bleedingandsickle-celltrait percentoflightningstrikefatalitiesoccur essentialinformationandknowl-
collapses. All athletics health care during outdoor organized sport activi- edge.Forexample,thefollowing
ties. Although the probability of being
providers and coaches, including slogan from the National Light-
struck by lightning is low, the odds are
strength and conditioning coaches, ning Safety Institute is an effec-
significantly greater when a storm is in
sport coaches and all athletics per- tiveguide:“Ifyouseeit,fleeit;if
the area and proper safety precautions
sonnel conducting activities with you can hear it, clear it.” This
arenotfollowed.
student-athletes, should review and slogan reflects the fact that on
Education and prevention are the
practicetheplanatleastannually. the first sound of thunder, light-
keys to lightning safety. Prevention
ningislikelywithin8to10miles
shouldbeginlongbeforeanyintercolle-
LIGHTNINGSAFETY giate athletics event or practice occurs andcapableofstrikingyourloca-
Lightning is the most consistent bybeingproactiveandhavingalightning tion. No punishment or retribu-
and significant weather hazard that safetyplaninplace.Thefollowingsteps tion should be applied to
may affect intercollegiate athletics. are recommended to mitigate the light- someonewhochoosestoevacu-
Within the United States, the National ninghazard: ate if perceiving that his or her
19
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 20 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
lifeisindangerbecauseofsevere thatactstoelectricallygroundthe account for the time it takes to
weather. structure.Avoidusingtheshower, move a team and crowd to their
2. Designation of a person to plumbing facilities, and electrical designated safer locations. Indi-
monitor threatening weather appliances, and stay away from viduals should not be allowed to
andtonotifythechainofcom- open windows and doorways enter the outdoor venue and
mand who can make the deci- during a thunderstorm.b. In the should be directed to the safer
sion to remove a team, game absenceofasturdy,frequentlyin- location.
personnel, television crews, habitedbuilding,anyvehiclewith 3. Avoid using landline telephones
and spectators from an athlet- a hard metal roof (neither a con- except in emergency situations.
ics site or event. That person vertible nor a golf cart) with the People have been killed while
must have recognized and windowsshutprovidesameasure usingalandlinetelephoneduring
unchallengeable authority to of safety. The hard metal frame athunderstorm.Cellularorcord-
suspend activity. and roof, not the rubber tires, less phones are safe alternatives
3. Planned instructions/announce- are what protects occupants by toalandlinephone,particularlyif
ments for participants and spec- dissipating lightning current the person and the antenna are
tators, designation of warning around the vehicle and not locatedwithinasaferstructureor
andallclearsignals,propersign- through the occupants. It is location, and if all other precau-
age,anddesignationofsaferpla- importantnottotouchthemetal tions are followed.
ces from the lightning hazard. framework of the vehicle. Some 4. To resume athletics activities,
4.Dailymonitoringoflocalweather athleticsevents rentschoolbuses lightning safety experts recom-
reports before any practice or assaferlocationstoplacearound mend waiting 30 minutes after
event,andareliableandaccurate open courses or fields. both the last sound of thunder
source of information about B. For large-scale events, continuous andlastflashoflightning.Ause-
severe weather that may form monitoring of the weather should ful slogan is “half an hour since
during scheduled intercollegiate occurfromthetimepre-eventactivities thunderroars,nowit’ssafetogo
athletics events or practices. Of begin throughout the event. outdoors.” At night, be aware
special note should be National C. Venue-specific activity-suspension, that lightning can be visible at
Weather Service-issued thunder- venue evacuation, and activity- a much greater distance than
storm “watches” or “warnings” resumption plans: during the day as clouds are
andthewarningsignsofdevelop- 1. On the first sound of thunder, beinglitfromtheinsidebylight-
ing thunderstorms in the area, lightning is likely within 8 to 10 ning. This greater distance may
such as high winds or darkening miles and capable of striking mean that the lightning is no
skies.A“watch”meansthatcon- your location. Please note that longer a significant threat. At
ditions are favorable for severe thunder may be hard to hear if night, use both the sound of
weather to develop in an area; there is an athletics event going thunderandseeingthelightning
a “warning” means that severe on, particularly in stadia with channel itself to decide on re-
weather has been reported in an large crowds. Lightning can setting the 30-minute “return-
areaandforeveryonetotakethe strike from blue sky and in the to-play” clock before resuming
proper precautions. It should be absence of rain. At least 10 per- outdoor athletics activities.
noted that neither watches nor cent of lightning occurs when D. Emergency care protocols: People
warningsare issued forlightning. thereisnorainfallandwhenblue who have been struck by lightning do
An NOAA weather radio is par- skyisoftenvisiblesomewherein not carry an electrical charge. There-
ticularly helpful in providing this the sky, especially with summer fore, CPR is safe for the responder. If
information. thunderstorms. Lightning can, possible, an injured person should be
5.Identificationof,andamechanism and does, strike 10 (or more) moved to a safer location before start-
forensuringaccessto,theclosest miles away from the rain shaft. ingCPR.Lightning-strikevictimswho
saferbuildings,vehicles,andloca- Be aware of local weather pat- show signs of cardiac or respiratory
tions to the field or playing area, terns and review local weather arrest need prompt emergency help.
and an estimate of how long it forecastsbeforeanoutdoorprac- If you are in a 911 community, call
takestoevacuatetothatlocation tice or event. for help. Prompt, aggressive CPR has
for all personnel at the event. A 2. Ensure a safe and orderly evacu- beenhighlyeffectiveforthesurvivalof
safer building or location is ation from the venue with an- victims of lightning strike. Automatic
defined as:a. Any fully enclosed nouncements, signage, safety external defibrillators are a safe and
building normally occupied or informationinprograms,anden- effective means of reviving persons in
frequently used by people, with trances that can also serve as cardiac arrest. Planned access to early
plumbingand/orelectricalwiring mass exits. Planning should defibrillation should be part of your
20
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 21 ---
emergency plan. However, CPR Inherent risks be injured by negligent acts of the
shouldneverbedelayedwhilesearch- As the term implies, these risks StrengthandConditioning staff(e.g.,fail-
ing for an AED. areinherentintheactivity.Generally,in- ure to inspect/maintain exercise equip-
Note: Weather watchers, real-time juriescausedbyinherentrisksareacci- ment, failure to provide CPR or First Aid
weather forecasts and commercial dentalinnature,notpreventable,andno when needed). A waiver document, also
weather-warning, and lightning monitoring one’s fault. The informed consent and calledaprospectiverelease,providesthe
devices or services are all tools that can agreement to participate documents best legal protection for lawsuits arising
be used to aid in the monitoring, notifica- providethebestlegalprotectionforlaw- frominjuriescausedbynegligence.Once
tion, and decision-making regarding stop- suitsarisingfromsuchinjuries.Although again,whiletheactual sections and con-
pageofplay,evacuation,andreturntoplay. actualsectionsandcontentofprotective tent of such documents vary depending
documentsvary(anddependuponstate onstatelaw,waiverdocumentsgenerally
law),thefollowingaregenerallyincluded includeexculpatoryclause;descriptionof
APPENDIX8.PROTECTIVE LEGAL in informed consent and agreement to risks (“assumption of risk” language);
DOCUMENTS participatedocuments: indemnification language (may not be
Notes:Thisappendixprovidesgen- valid); severability clause; affirmation of
eral legal information. Protective legal legalcapacity;andsignatures.
Informed consent.
documents should not be adopted or (cid:1) The “exculpatory clause” is a key
Purpose of the activity
usedinanycontextwithoutindividualized section within the waiver explicitly stat-
(cid:1)
Risks of the activity*
legaladvice.Theinformationinthisappen- ing that the participant releases the
(cid:1)
Benefits of the activity
dix has been adapted with permission Strength and Conditioning facility for
(cid:1)
Confidentiality
from an article by JoAnn Eickhoff- any liability associated with negligence
(cid:1)
Inquiries
Shemek, entitled “Distinguishing Protec- by the facility or its employees. This
(cid:1)
tive Legal Documents”, published in the Signatures clause,whichmustbewrittenverycare-
ACSM’sJournalofHealthandFitness(8). fully to be enforceable, provides evi-
Agreement to participate.
dence that the participant gave up
(cid:1)
Nature of the activity
(waived)his/herrighttofileanegligence
TYPESOFPROTECTIVELEGAL (cid:1)
Possible consequences of injury*
lawsuitagainstthefacility.However,the
DOCUMENTS (cid:1)
Behavioral expectations of the
exculpatoryclausedoesnotprovidepro-
Institutions such as universities/
participant tectionfromlawsuitsarisingfrominjuries
collegesandhighschoolsoften require (cid:1)
Condition of the participant because of inherent risks, and an
athletes to read and comprehend, and (cid:1)
Concluding statement “assumption of risk” section is often
sign some type of protective legal doc- (cid:1)
Signatures addedtothewaiver forthispurpose.
ument(s) before participation in athleti-
cally related activities, including *Note: “assumption of risk”
Extreme forms of conduct
strength and conditioning. These docu- language.
ments can help protect the institution A section within each of these Injuries can also be caused by
anditsemployeesfrompotentiallycostly documents is devoted to informing the extreme forms of conduct (often called
legalclaimsandlawsuits.Thelawinvolv- participantofthepotentialrisks,includ- gross negligence, willful and wanton con-
ing protective legal documents is quite ing those inherent in the activity. It is duct,orrecklessconduct).Forexample,if
complex, and understanding their func- importantthatthissectioncarefullyde- the Strength and Conditioning staff had
tion and the specific legal protection scribes these risks (e.g., types of acci- previous knowledgeofanexisting danger
theyprovide isoftenconfusing. dents that might occur and the orriskbuttooknocorrectiveactiontohelp
Several types of protective legal consequences of these accidents), preventresultinginjuries,thisfailuretoact
documents exist. Three that are com- and that the language used is under- would most likely constitute an extreme
monly used in the health/fitness field standable to the person who will be formofconduct.Generally,nodocuments
maybeapplicableinStrengthandCon- signingit.Thisprovidesan“assumption can provide legal protection for grossly
ditioning settings: informed consent, of risk” defense, meaning the partici- negligentorrecklessconduct.Afewstates
agreement to participate, and waiver. pant knew and fully understood the may allow the use of a waiver to protect
Each provides protection from lawsuits risks, appreciated the risks, and volun- fromsuchconduct,butmostdonot(11).
arisingfromcertaintypesofinjuriesthat tarilyassumedthem.Ingeneral,thelaw
can occur while participating in activi- does not allow individuals to recover MAKINGPROTECTIVELEGAL
ties,asexplained below. compensationforinjuriesresultingfrom DOCUMENTSENFORCEABLE
assumed risks. Protective legal documents,
CAUSESOFINJURYASSOCIATED signed by participants before their par-
WITHPHYSICALACTIVITY Negligence ticipation in strength and conditioning
Thereare3causesofinjuryasso- Injuries can be caused by negli- programs and services, can provide
ciated with physical activity: inherent gence,whichisafailuretoactasareason- a good defense for the Strength and
risks, negligence, and extreme forms of able and prudent professional would act Conditioningfacilityafteraninjuredpar-
conduct(10). underthecircumstances.Participantscan ticipantfilesaclaimorlawsuit.Avariety
21
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 22 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
of factors should be considered for (cid:1) Protective documents must be Reviewers:BobAlejo,CSCS,RSCC*E;
these forms to be legally enforce- stored in a secure place for the Brian Gearity, PhD, CSCS, RSCC,
able(8,20): amount of time consistent with the FNSCA, ATC; Jon Jost, CSCS,
(cid:1) A lawyer who is knowledgeable statute of limitations, which may be RSCC*E; TeenaMurray, MS, RSCC*D,
about the law regarding protective up to 4 years in some states. MSCC; and Mike Nitka, MS, CSCS*D,
documentsmustreviewyourprotec- RSCC*E, FNSCA. 2009 version: N.
tive legal documents to help ensure Travis Triplett, PhD, CSCS*D, FNSCA
theyarewrittenproperlyandreflect The choice of document or com- (Chair);MichaelDoscher,MS,CSCS*D,
the law in your state. bination of documents to use is a very CP; Patrick McHenry, MS, CSCS*D,
(cid:1) Informed consent and waiver docu- important decision. In situations where CP; Mack Rubley, PhD, CSCS*D; and
mentsarecontracts,andcanonlybe strength and conditioning activities are Chat Williams, MS, CSCS*D, NSCA-
signedbyadultsbecauseminorscan- not covered in the employing institu- CPT*D. 2001 version: Steven Plisk,
tion’s legal documentation, Strength MS, CSCS (Chair); Mike Brass, MS,
not enter into a contract. “Agree-
and Conditioning professionals should CSCS; JoAnn Eickhoff-Shemek, PhD;
ment to participate” documents are
consult with a qualified lawyer to assist Boyd Epley, MEd, CSCS, FNSCA;
not contracts, and therefore can be
with these decisions and to review or David Herbert, JD; Joe Owens, MS,
signed by adults as well as minors.
(cid:1) writethedocumentsbeforeimplementa- CSCS*D; David Pearson, PhD,
The exculpatory clause used in
tion.Becauselegaladviceandconsulta- CSCS*D; and Dan Wathen, MS, ATC,
a waiver is not allowed in an
tion can be quite expensive, Strength CSCS*D,NSCACPT*D.
informed consent or agreement to and Conditioning professionals may Thisdocumentwasreviewedand
participate.Ifanexculpatoryclause reduce costs by “drafting” their own approved by the National Strength and
isaddedtoanagreementtopartic- legal documents using information from Conditioning Association Board of
ipate for adults, it then becomes applicable resources (e.g., most univer- Directors.
a waiver.
sityresearchprotectionofficeshaveex-
(cid:1)
The exculpatory clause used in amples of agreement to participate and ConflictsofInterestandSourceofFunding:
awaiverisnotenforceableinmed- waiver documents, and examples of The authors report no conflicts of interest
ical or research settings, or in cer- informedconsentdocuments).Thesere- and no source of funding.
tain states where they are against sourcesshouldbesharedwithyourlaw-
public policy. In educational set- yer when he/she reviews the draftsand REFERENCES
tings such as a college/university, makesthefinaldocumentrevisions. 1. AmericanHeartAssociationguidelines
the general rule is that waivers are Written protective documents updateforcardiopulmonaryresuscitation
against public policy for required provideimportantevidencewhenalaw- andemergencycardiovascularcare.
activities but may be enforceable suit occurs. For example, if a Strength Circulation132(Suppl2):315–367,
for voluntary activities. andConditioningfacilityissuedforneg- 2015.
(cid:1) Informed consent documents used ligence, but has evidence that the 2. Armitage-JohnsonS.Providingasafe
in medical settings must be pro- injured party signed a properly written trainingenvironment:PartsIandII.
andadministeredwaiver,thisdocument StrengthCond16:64–65,1994;16(2):
videdbeforeapatienthasanykind
provides the evidence needed to seek 34.
of medical procedure. If the
summaryjudgment(i.e.,apretrialmotion 3. BaladyGJ,ChaitmanB,DriscollD,Foster
informed consent is not written or
inwhichthejudgecandismissthecase C,FroelicherE,GordonN,PateR,RippeJ,
administered properly, the health
because,asamatteroflaw,thereisno andBazzarreT;AHAandACSM.
careprovider(andmedicalfacility)
issuetobetriedinacourtoflaw).Inthis Recommendationsforcardiovascular
could be found negligent for not screening,staffingandemergencypolicies
situation, the legal document protects
informing the patient of particular athealth/fitnessfacilities.Circulation97:
thefacilityfromapotentiallycostlyneg-
risks. This also applies in research 2283–2293,1998;MedicineandScience
ligence lawsuit.
settings because subjects must be inSportsandExercise30(6):1009–1018,
1998.
properly informed of risks through
informed consent (note that this APPENDIX 9.NSCA 4. BorkowskiRP.AWeightRoomSafety
point is applicable in Strength and PROFESSIONALSTANDARDS AND Checklist.TheFreeLibrary.Scholastic,Inc,
GUIDELINESTASKFORCE 2007.Availableat:https://www.
Conditioning settings, where ath-
CONTRIBUTORS thefreelibrary.com/A+weight+room
letes participate as human subjects
N. Travis Triplett, PhD, CSCS*D, +safety+checklist.-a0167512284.
in research studies).
FNSCA(Chair);VicBrown,MS,CSCS, Accessed11/5/2017.
(cid:1)
Alldocumentsmustbeadministered
RSCC*D, ATC; Scott Caulfield, MA, 5. BucherCAandKroteeML.Managementof
properly. For example, participants CSCS*D, RSCC*D; Michael Doscher, PhysicalEducationandSport(11thed).
should have ample time to read MS, MSCC, SCCC, CSCS, RSCC*D; BostonMA:McGraw-Hill,1998.
them and a well-trained employee PatrickMcHenry,MA,CSCS*D,RSCC; 6. CalhoonGandFryAC.Injuryratesand
should verbally explain the docu- Traci Statler, PhD, CC-AASP, CSCS; profilesofelitecompetitiveweightlifters.
ment to each participant. ReedWainwright,JD,CSCS,RSCC*D. JAthleticTrain34:232–238,1999.
22
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 23 ---
7. CaulfieldSandBerningerD.Exercise 20. HerbertDLandHerbertWG.Legal 34. MalinaRM.Weighttraininginyouth-
techniqueforfreeweightandmachine AspectsofPreventive,Rehabilitativeand growth,maturationandsafety:An
training.In:NSCA’sEssentialsofStrength RecreationalExercisePrograms(3rded). evidence-basedreview.ClinJSportsMed
TrainingandConditioning(4thed).Haff Canton,OH:PRCPublishing,1993. 16:478–487,2006.
GGandTriplettNT,eds.ChampaignIL: 21. HerbertDL.Supervisionforstrengthand 35. MaronBJ,ThompsonPD,PufferJC,
HumanKinetics,2016.pp.350–408. conditioningactivities.StrengthCond16: McGrewCA,StrongWB,DouglasPS,
8. Eickhoff-ShemekJ.Distinguishing 32–33,1994. ClarkLT,MittenMJ,CrawfordMH,Atkins
protectivelegaldocuments.ACSMs 22. HerbertDL.Agoodreasonforkeeping DL,DriscollDJ,andEpsteinAE;AHAand
HealthFitnessJ5:27–29,2001. records.StrengthCond16:64,1994. ACSM.Cardiovascularpreparticipation
screeningofcompetitiveathletes.
9. Eickhoff-ShemekJ.Standardsofpractice. 23. HillmannAandPearsonDR.Supervision:
Circulation94:850–856,1996;Medicine
In:LawforRecreationandSportManagers Thekeytostrengthtrainingsuccess.
andScienceinSportsandExercise28
(2nded).CottenD,WildeJ,andWlohanJ, StrengthCond17:67–71,1995.
(12):1445–1452,1996.
eds.Dubuque,IA:Kendall/HuntPublishing,
24. HudyA.Facilitydesign,layout,and
2001.pp.293–302. 36. MaronBJ,ThompsonPD,PufferJC,
organization.In:NSCA’sEssentialsof
McGrewCA,StrongWB,DouglasPS,
10. Eickhoff-ShemekJandDejaK.4steps StrengthTrainingandConditioning(4th
ClarkLT,MittenMJ,CrawfordMH,Atkins
tominimizelegalliabilityinexercise ed).HaffGGandTriplettNT,eds.
DL,DriscollDJ,andEpsteinAE;AHA.
programs.ACSMsHealthFitnessJ4:13– Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2016.pp.
Cardiovascularpreparticipationscreening
18,2000. 623–639.
ofcompetitiveathletes:Addendum.
11. Eickhoff-ShemekJM,HerbertDL,and 25. JeffreysI.Warm-upandflexibilitytraining. Circulation97:2294,1998.
ConnaughtonDP.Introducingtherisk In:NSCA’sEssentialsofStrengthTraining
37. MazurLJ,YetmanRJ,andRisserWL.
managementpyramid.ACSMsHealth andConditioning(4thed).HaffGGand
Weight-traininginjuries:Commoninjuries
FitnessJ12:37–39,2008. TriplettNT,eds.Champaign,IL:Human andpreventativemethods.SportsMed16:
Kinetics,2016.pp.317–350.
12. FaigenbaumADandMicheliLJ;ACSM. 57–63,1993.
CurrentCommentfromtheAmerican 26. JonesCS,ChristensenC,andYoungM. 38. MyerGD,QuatmanCE,KhouryJ,WallEJ,
CollegeofSportsMedicine:Youth Weighttraininginjurytrends:A20-year andHewettTE.Youthversusadult
StrengthTraining.Indianapolis,IN:ACSM, survey.PhysSportsmed28:61–72, “weightlifting”injuriespresentingtoUnited
1998.Availableat:http://www.acsm.org/ 2000. Statesemergencyrooms:Accidental
public-information/sportsmedicinebasics/ 27. KatzenbachJRandSmithDK.TheWisdom versusnonaccidentalinjurymechanisms.
youth-strength-training.Accessed11/5/ ofTeams.Boston,MA:HarvardBusiness JStrengthCondRes23:2054–2060,
2017. School,1993. 2009.
13. FaigenbaumAD,MyerGD,NaclerioF,and 28. KatzenbachJR.RealChangeLeaders. 39. NationalAthleticTrainers’Association.
CasasAA.Injurytrendsandpreventionin NewYork,NY:TimesBooks/Random RecommendationsandGuidelinesfor
youthresistancetraining.Strength House,1997. AppropriateMedicalCoverageof
ConditioningJ33:36–41,2011. 29. KeoghJWLandWinwoodPW.The IntercollegiateAthletics.Dallas,TX:NATA,
14. HaffGG,BerningerD,andCaulfieldS. epidemiologyofinjuriesacrosstheweight- 2007.Availableat:http://www.nata.org/
Exercisetechniqueforalternativemodes trainingsports.SportsMed47:479–501, sites/default/files/amciarecsandguides.
andnontraditionalimplementtraining.In: 2017. pdf.Accessed11/5/2017.
NSCA’sEssentialsofStrengthTraining 30. KrollW.Selectingstrengthtraining 40. NationalCollegiateAthleticAssociation.
andConditioning(4thed).HaffGGand equipment.NatlStrengthCondJ12:65– NCAASportsSponsorshipand
TriplettNT,eds.Champaign,IL:Human 70,1990. ParticipationRatesReport.Indianapolis,
Kinetics,2016.pp.409–438. IN:NCAA,2015.Availableat:http://www.
31. KrollB.Liabilityconsiderationsforstrength
ncaapublications.com/productdownloads/
15. HaffGGandTriplettNT,eds.NSCA’s trainingfacilities.StrengthCond17:16–
PR1516.pdf.Accessed11/5/2017.
EssentialsofStrengthTrainingand 17,1995.
Conditioning(4thed).Champaign,IL: 41. NationalFederationofStateHighSchool
32. LloydRS,FaigenbaumAD,StoneMH,
HumanKinetics,2016. OliverJL,JeffreysI,MoodyJA,BrewerC, Associations.NFHSParticipationSurvey:
2015-2016.Indianapolis,IN:NFHS,2016.
16. HallingDH.Liabilityconsiderationsof PierceKC,McCambridgeTM,HowardR,
Availableat:http://www.nfhs.org/
thestrengthandconditioningspecialist. HerringtonL,HainlineB,MicheliLJ,Jaques
ParticipationStatistics/ParticipationStatistics/
NatlStrengthCondAssocJ12:57–60, R,KraemerWJ,McBrideMG,BestTM,
Accessed11/5/2017.
1990. ChuDA,AlvarBA,andMyerGD.Position
statementonyouthresistancetraining:The 42. CSCSExamContentDescription.
17. HallingDH.Legalterminologyforthe
2014InternationalConsensus.BrJSports ColoradoSprings,CO:NSCA,2016.
strengthandconditioningspecialist.Natl
StrengthCondAssocJ13:59–61,1991.
Med48:498–505,2014.
43. OccupationalSafetyandHealth
33. LloydRS,CroninJB,FaigenbaumAD,Haff Administration,U.S.DepartmentofLabor.
18. HamillBP.Relativesafetyofweightlifting
GG,HowardR,KraemerWJ,MicheliLJ, OSHARegulations(Training
andweighttraining.JStrengthCondRes
MyerGD,andOliverJL.Nationalstrength RequirementsinOSHAStandards;
8:53–57,1994.
andconditioningassociationposition 1910.1030:Blood-BornePathogens).
19. HerbertDL.Legalaspectsofstrengthand statementonlong-termathletic Washington,DC:OSHA,2015.Available
conditioning.NatlStrengthCondAssocJ development.JStrengthCondRes30: at:https://www.osha.gov/Publications/
15:79,1993. 1491–1509,2016. osha2254.pdf.Accessed11/5/2017.
23
StrengthandConditioningJournal | www.nsca-scj.com
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

--- Page 24 ---
NSCA Standards and Guidelines
44. ParsonsJT,ed;NationalCollegiateAthletic 50. SchmidtRAandWrisbergCA.Motor 56. StatlerTandBrownV.Facilitypolicies,
Association.2014–15NCAASports LearningandPerformance(2nded). procedures,andlegalissues.In:NSCA’s
MedicineHandbook(25thed). Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,1999. EssentialsofStrengthTrainingand
Indianapolis,IN:NCAA,2014.pp.15–18. 51. SiegelJD,RhinehartE,JacksonM,and Conditioning(4thed).HaffGGandTriplett
45. PearsonD,FaigenbaumA,ConleyM,and ChiarelloL;theHealthcareInfection NT,eds.Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,
KraemerWJ.Basicguidelinesforthe ControlPracticesAdvisoryCommittee. 2016.pp.641–656.
resistancetrainingofathletes.Strength 2007guidelineforisolationprecautions:
CondJ22:14–27,2000. Preventingtransmissionofinfectious 57. StoneMH,O’BryantHS,SchillingBK,and
agentsinhealthcaresettings.Availableat: KochA.Periodization:Effectsof
46. PreparticipationPhysicalEvaluationTask
https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/ manipulatingvolumeandintensity,parts1
Force,AmericanAcademyofFamily
guidelines/isolation/index.html.Accessed and2.StrengthCondJ21:56–62,1999;
Physicians,AmericanAcademyof
11/5/2017. 21:54–60.
Pediatrics,AmericanCollegeofSports
Medicine,AmericanMedicalSocietyfor 52. SieweJ,RudatJ,RollinghoffM,Schlegel 58. StoneMH,PliskS,andCollinsD.Training
UJ,EyselP,andMichaelJW.Injuriesand
SportsMedicine,AmericanOrthopaedic principles:Evaluationofmodesand
overusesyndromesinpowerlifting.IntJ
SocietyforSportsMedicineandAmerican methodsofresistancetraining.Strength
SportsMed32:703–711,2011.
OsteopathicAcademyofSportsMedicine. CondJ22:65–76,2000.
PreparticipationPhysicalEvaluation(4th 53. SieweJ,MarxG,KnollP,EyselP,
ZarghooniK,GrafM,HerrenC,Sobottke 59. StrangeDandNitkaM.Whogetsakey-Is
ed).ElkGroveVillage,IL:American
R,andMichaelJ.Injuriesandoveruse supervisionintheweightroomreally
AcademyofPediatrics,2010.
syndromesincompetitiveandelite necessary?StrengthCondJ26:23–24,
47. RabinoffMA.Weightroomlitigation:
bodybuilding.IntJSportsMed35:943– 2004.
What’sitallabout?StrengthCond16: 948,2014.
10–12,1994. 60. TharrettSJandPetersonJA,eds;ACSM.
54. SiffMC.Supertraining(6thed).Denver, ACSM’sHealth/FitnessFacilityStandards
48. RabinoffMA.32reasonsforthestrength, CO:SupertrainingInstitute,2003.
andGuidelines(4thed).Champaign,IL:
conditioning,andexerciseprofessionalto
understandthelitigationprocess.Strength 55. SpanoM.Basicnutritionfactorsin HumanKinetics,2012.
health.In:NSCA’sEssentialsof
Cond16:20–25,1994. 61. WeisenthalBM,BeckCA,MaloneyMD,
StrengthTrainingandConditioning(4th
49. SchmidtRAandLeeTD.MotorControl ed).HaffGGandTriplettNT,eds. DeHavenKE,andGiordanoBD.Injuryrate
andLearning(3rded).Champaign,IL: Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2016. andpatternsamongcrossFitathletes.Orthop
HumanKinetics,1999. pp.175–200. JSportsMed2:2325967114531177,2014.
24
VOLUME39 | NUMBER6 | DECEMBER2017
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Copyright ª National Strength and Conditioning Association. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
