
--- Page 1 ---
OFFICIAL POSITION STAND OF THE NATIONAL STRENGTH AND CONDITIONING ASSOCIATION
N S C
ATIONAL TRENGTH AND ONDITIONING
A P S L -T
SSOCIATION OSITION TATEMENT ON ONG ERM
A D
THLETIC EVELOPMENT
R S. L ,1,2 J B. C ,2,3 A D. F ,4 G. G H ,3
HODRI LOYD OHN RONIN VERY AIGENBAUM REGORY AFF
R H ,5 W J. K ,6 L J. M ,7,8,9 G D. M ,9,10,11,12
ICK OWARD ILLIAM RAEMER YLE ICHELI REGORY YER AND
J L. O 1,2
ON LIVER
1Youth Physical Development Unit, School of Sport, Cardiff Metropolitan University, Cardiff, United Kingdom; 2Sports
Performance Research Institute New Zealand, AUT University, Auckland, New Zealand; 3Center for Exercise and Sport
ScienceResearch,EdithCowanUniversity,Joondalup,Australia;4DepartmentofHealthandExerciseScience,TheCollegeof
New Jersey, Ewing, New Jersey; 5Department of Kinesiology, West Chester University, West Chester, Pennsylvania;
6DepartmentofHumanSciences,TheOhioStateUniversity,Columbus,Ohio;7DepartmentofOrthopaedics,DivisionofSports
Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital,Boston, Massachusetts; 8Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 9The Micheli
Center for Sports Injury Prevention, Boston, Massachusetts; 10Division of Sports Medicine, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio; 11Department of Pediatrics and Orthopaedic Surgery, College of Medicine, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio; and 12Department of Orthopaedics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
ABSTRACT
theyoungbodiesofmoderndayyouthareoftenill-preparedto
toleratetherigorsofsportsorphysicalactivity.Allyouthshould
Lloyd,RS,Cronin,JB,Faigenbaum,AD,Haff,GG,Howard,R,
Kraemer, WJ, Micheli, LJ, Myer, GD, and Oliver, JL. National engageinregularphysicalactivityandthusshouldbeviewedas
“athletes”andaffordedtheopportunitytoenhanceathleticismin
Strength and Conditioning Association position statement on
long-term athletic development. J Strength Cond Res 30(6): an individualized, holistic, and child-centered manner. Because
of emerging interest in long-term athletic development, an
1491–1509, 2016—There has recently been a growing inter-
authorshipteamwastaskedonbehalfoftheNationalStrength
est in long-term athletic development for youth. Because of
and Conditioning Association (NSCA) to critically synthesize
their unique physical, psychological, and social differences,
existing literature and current practices within the field and to
children and adolescents should engage in appropriately pre-
scribedexerciseprogramsthatpromotephysicaldevelopment composearelevantpositionstatement.Thisdocumentwassub-
sequentlyreviewedandformallyratifiedbytheNSCABoardof
to prevent injury and enhance fitness behaviors that can be
retainedlaterinlife.Irrespectiveofwhetherachildisinvolved Directors. A list of 10 pillars of successful long-term athletic
development are presented, which summarize the key recom-
inorganized sport or engagesin recreationalphysical activity,
there remains a need to adopt a structured, logical, and mendations detailed within the position statement. With these
pillarsinplace,itisbelievedthattheNSCAcan(a)helpfoster
evidence-basedapproachtothelong-termdevelopmentofath-
amoreunifiedandholisticapproachtolong-termathleticdevel-
leticism.Thisisofparticularimportanceconsideringthealarm-
opment,(b)promotethebenefitsofalifetimeofhealthyphysical
ingly high number of youth who fail to meet global physical
activity, and (c) prevent and/or minimize injuries from sports
activityrecommendationsandconsequentlypresentwithneg-
participationforallboysandgirls.
ative health profiles. However, appropriate exercise prescrip-
tionisalsocrucialforthoseyoungathleteswhoarephysically KEY WORDS
long-term athlete development, youth physical
underprepared and at risk of overuse injury because of high
development,children,adolescents,health,fitness
volumes of competition and an absence of preparatory condi-
tioning. Whether the child accumulates insufficient or exces- OPERATIONAL TERMS
sive amounts of exercise, or falls somewhere between these
Throughout this position statement, the following opera-
opposing ends of the spectrum, it is generally accepted that tional terms are defined as given below:
(cid:1)
Athleticismistheabilitytorepeatedlyperformarangeof
AddresscorrespondencetoDr.RhodriS.Lloyd,rlloyd@cardiffmet.ac.uk. movements with precision and confidence in a variety
30(6)/1491–1509 of environments, which require competent levels of
motor skills, strength, power, speed, agility, balance,
JournalofStrengthandConditioningResearch
(cid:1)2016NationalStrengthandConditioningAssociation coordination, and endurance.
1491
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 2 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
(cid:1)
The term long-term athletic development refers to the turn is different from the physiology of adults. Clear differ-
habitual development of “athleticism” over time to encesbetweenchildrenandadolescents/adultsexistinmus-
improve health and fitness, enhance physical perfor- cle structure (133,193), size (62,139), activation patterns
mance, reduce the relative risk of injury, and develop (61,62,198,259),andfunction(77,262).Thesedifferenceswill
the confidence and competence of all youth. typically predispose children to reduced force-producing or
(cid:1)
The terms youth and young athletes represent both chil- force-attenuating capabilities, which will have implications
dren(uptotheapproximateageof11yearsingirlsand for absolute measures of physical performance and relative
13 years in boys) and adolescents (typically including risk of injury. Additionally, it is clear that children’s meta-
girls aged 12–18 years and boys aged 14–18 years). bolic profile is more conducive to oxidative metabolism
(cid:1)
Growthisthemostsignificantbiologicalactivityduring (211) and recovery rates from high-intensity exercise are
thefirst2decadesoflifeandisdefinedasanincreasein shorterinyouththaninadults(212,250).Thissuggeststhat
the size attained by specific parts of the body, or the aerobic and anaerobic exercise thresholds will likely vary
body as a whole. according to the stage of development. Combined, these
(cid:1)
Maturationisdefinedasprogresstowardamaturestate examples underlie the potential age- or maturity-related ef-
and varies in timing, tempo, and magnitude between fects on differential physiology between youth and adults.
different bodily systems. Notwithstanding other age-related and/or maturity-related
(cid:1)
Aqualifiedprofessionalpossesses(a)anappropriateunder- differencesinphysiology(e.g.,skeletal,cardiovascular,respi-
standing of pediatric exercise science, exercise prescrip- ratory, or endocrine systems), practitioners must be cogni-
tion, technique evaluation, and testing methods, (b) zant of the fact that these systems will develop during
relevant coaching experience and a strong pedagogical childhood and adolescence at different rates and in a non-
background, and (c) a recognized strength and condi- linear manner (157). This variance in physical development
tioning qualification, for example, the Certified Strength is most notable when comparing a group of children of the
and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS)certification. samechronologicalage(23,145,154,156),wherebyindividu-
als of the same chronological age can differ markedly with
INTRODUCTION respectto biologicalmaturity (14,145,157). Biologicalmatu-
ration reflects the process of progressing toward a mature
In an address at the University of Pennsylvania in 1940, the
state,andvariesintimingandtempo,andbetweendifferent
32nd President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt,
systemswithinthebody(22).Significantinterindividualvar-
delivered the adage “We cannot always build the future for
iance exists for the extent (magnitude of change), timing
ouryouth,butwecanbuildouryouthforthefuture.” Con-
(onset of change), and tempo (rate of change) of biological
ceptually, this statement is a suitable philosophy for long-
maturation.Inadditiontothesedevelopmentalincongruities
term athletic development. Ultimately, it is impossible to
among youth, the manner in which they respond to, and
truly determine whether a child will be involved in elite-
recover from, training is likely to differ between youth of
levelsportorsimplychoosetoengageinrecreationalphys-
thesameageormaturationstatus(5,15,16,147,219).Indeed,
ical activity later in life; however, it is imperative that all
a real challenge for sport and exercise scientists and practi-
children learn how and why various types of physical con-
tionersworkingwithyouthistodeterminewhetherchanges
ditioning are important to suitably prepare them for the
in performance are mediated from training-induced or
physical and psychological demands of a lifetime of sport
growth-related adaptations.
and physical activity. Although the development of athleti-
cism has traditionally been viewed as a goal for aspiring
Effects of Sport and Physical Activity on Growth and Develop-
“young athletes,” it is crucial that strength and conditioning
ment. Physically active children will typically outperform
coaches, personal trainers, teachers, parents, and medical
those who are inactive in most indices of physical
professionalsadoptasystematicapproachtolong-termath-
performance(155).Beinginactiveisassociatedwithahigh
letic development for youth of all ages, abilities, and aspira-
probabilityofbeingoverweightorobeseduringthegrow-
tions (143). A list of the pillars of successful long-term
ing years (179,253). Therefore, physical activity, exercise,
athletic development is provided in Table 1.
and sport should be viewed as key preventive treatments
1.Long-TermAthleticDevelopmentPathwaysShould for unfavorable weight status and an important precursor
AccommodatefortheHighlyIndividualizedandNonlinear for healthy growth and development (75,76,183). There
NatureoftheGrowthandDevelopmentofYouth exists a positive relationship between motor skill compe-
It is commonly stated that “children are not miniature tenceandphysicalactivityacrosschildhood(214).There-
adults” and because of their immature physiological and fore, it is essential that all youth be encouraged to
psychosocial state, they should be prescribed appropriate enhance athleticism from an early age by engaging in
training programs that commensurate with their technical multifacetedtraininginclusiveofarangeofdifferenttrain-
ability and stage of development (145). Children’s anatomy ing modes (142). Previous misconceptions regarding the
and physiology differs from that of adolescents, which in impact of physical training on growth and development
1492 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 3 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
2.YouthofAllAges,Abilities,
andAspirationsShould
TABLE 1.Ten pillarsforsuccessful long-term athletic development.
EngageinLong-TermAthletic
No. Description DevelopmentProgramsThat
PromoteBothPhysicalFitness
1. Long-term athletic development pathways should accommodate for the
andPsychosocialWell-Being
highly individualized and non-linear nature of the growth and development
The development of physical fit-
of youth.
2. Youthofallages,abilitiesandaspirationsshouldengageinlong-termathletic ness in youth is a complex pro-
developmentprogramsthatpromoteboth physicalfitness andpsychosocial cess, which involves interaction
wellbeing. ofgrowth,maturation,andtrain-
3. Allyouthshouldbeencouragedtoenhance physicalfitnessfromearly
ing (5,15,16,145,219,261). Practi-
childhood,withaprimary focusonmotorskillandmuscularstrength
tioners should appreciate the
development.
4. Long-term athletic development pathways should encourage an early potential impact that other
samplingapproachforyouththatpromotesandenhancesabroadrangeof lifestyle factors will have on
motor skills. physical fitness development
5. Healthandwellbeingofthechildshould alwaysbethecentraltenet oflong-
and physical activity engage-
termathleticdevelopmentprograms.
ment,includingdietarybehav-
6. Youthshouldparticipateinphysicalconditioningthathelpsreducetheriskof
injurytoensure theiron-goingparticipationinlong-termathleticdevelopment iors (48,52), educational stress
programs. (159), sleep patterns (95,163),
7. Long-termathletic developmentprogramsshouldprovide allyouthwith psychosocial health (24), and
arangeoftrainingmodestoenhanceboth health-andskill-related
unrealistic external pressures
componentsoffitness.
from significant others such
8. Practitionersshoulduserelevantmonitoring andassessment toolsaspartof
along-term athleticdevelopment strategy. as parents or coaches
9. Practitionersworking withyouthshould systematicallyprogress and (201,251). Cumulatively, all
individualize trainingprogramsforsuccessful long-term athleticdevelopment. these factors can impact the
10. Qualifiedprofessionalsandsoundpedagogical approachesarefundamental
engagement and enjoyment
tothesuccessoflong-term athletic developmentprograms.
experienced by youth, adher-
ence rates to training pro-
grams, and consequently the
magnitude and rate of devel-
opment of physical fitness.
trajectories are not supported with literature, especially as Despitemanyfactorsimpactingthetrainingprocessof
data are often correlational and cross-sectional in nature youth, there is often varying levels of understanding
(22,156). Although fears previously existed surrounding and a lack of coordinated planning among those person-
the effect of physical training on eventual growth of youth nel who are responsible for the long-term welfare
(especially in sports such as gymnastics), evidence now and well-being of children and adolescents. With these
indicates that well-supervised physical training does not inconsistent approaches between key personnel in mind,
impair the development of secondary sex characteristics from a global perspective, 2 primary corollaries are
(153), does not delay age at menarche (160), and does evident within the pediatric literature. First, the number
not restrict eventual growth height (22,152). Moreover, of youth who are physically inactive, overweight, or
when rest and training are prescribed systematically, obeseanddemonstratepoorstandardsofphysicalfitness,
moderate-to-high intensity exercise is needed to help deficient levels of muscular strength, and inadequate
bone mineral accrual during childhood and adolescence motorskillcompetencyfollowsanunfavorabletrajectory
(3,13,87,88,116,118,267), which is of great benefit for (40,44,53–55,105,107,175,194,195,220,257). Of note, the
long-term skeletal health. term exercise deficit disorder (EDD) has been proposed
Owing to the unique physiology of children, it is clear todescribeaconditioncharacterizedbyreducedlevelsof
that practitioners working with youth require a sound moderate-to-vigorous physical activity that negatively
understandingofpediatricexercisescienceto(a)prescribe impact the health and well-being of youth (75,76).
training programs that are commensurate with the needs Importantly, children and adolescents who present with
and abilities of the individual, (b) distinguish between symptoms or behavioral patterns reflective of EDD
training-induced and growth-related adaptations in per- should be prescribed exercise interventions geared toward
formance (either positive or negative), and (c) understand the development of fundamental movement skills, founda-
the manner in which growth, maturation, and training tional strength, and general athleticism (76). The preva-
interact to optimize the training response and the devel- lence of substandard athleticism in modern-day youth
opment of athleticism. will not only likely increase the prevalence of overweight
1493
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 4 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
or obese youth (114,115) but also will increase the relative that they are able to transition between developmental
risk of injury for inactive youth who eventually engage in pathways (143). Adolescence offers a time in which young
physicalactivityorsports(25).Second,agrowingconcern athletesaremorelikelytodropoutofcompetitivesport(85),
for practitioners is the number of youth reporting with but some individuals will subsequently remain involved in
sport-related injuries as a consequence of overexposure to sport or physical activity at a recreational level. Similarly,
high volumes of sport-specific training/competition in the an adolescent may be identified by a sporting organization
absenceofadequaterestandrecovery(120).Consequently, asatalentedathletewhohaspreviouslyonlyparticipatedin
thereareanincreasednumberofyoungathletesexperienc- recreational physical activities. In either event, the adoles-
ing nonfunctional overreaching, overtraining, burnout, and cent should be supported from a holistic perspective. Phys-
eventual dropout from sport (57,162). Young athletes ically, they should be prescribed suitable training that
shouldbeencouragedtoparticipateinavarietyofactivities prepares them for the demands of their sport or physical
and sports, avoid year-round training for a single sport, activitywhileenablingthemtoachieverecommendedexpo-
andshouldbecarefullymonitoredinacoordinatedmanner sure to daily physical activity (264). They should also be
to prevent the risk of nonfunctional overreaching or provided with relevant support that encourages the devel-
overtraining. opment of a positive sense of self-worth, self-confidence,
Because of the multifactorial nature of physical fitness motivation,andenjoymenttofosteralifetimeofengagement
development and the current trends linked with both in sport and physical activity.
insufficient and excessive (specialized) amounts of physical
activity, a long-term and structured approach to the 3.AllYouthShouldBeEncouragedtoEnhancePhysical
development of athleticism in youth is warranted. Irrespec- FitnessFromEarlyChildhood,WithaPrimaryFocuson
tive of the population (e.g., youth, adult, seniors), it is MotorSkillandMuscularStrengthDevelopment
generally accepted that a structured training program will Whether a child is engaged in competitive sport or simply
produce superior results than unstructured training or no participates in recreational physical activity, a common
training at all (206). Long-term and systematically pro- philosophy of long-term athletic development models is
gressedapproachestodevelopingathleticisminyouth,deliv- thatengagement in physical activity during earlychildhood
ered by qualified professionals, will enable more effective is vital (143). The developmental time frame of brain matu-
control over training variables, a reduction in the risk of rationisassociatedwithaheighteneddegreeofneuralplas-
overtraining,andanenhancedoveralladaptationinphysiol- ticity during childhood (37,38,181,215). This stage of
ogy and performance. Although a number of authors have developmentinvolvestheprocessofpruningandanoverall
previously discussed the role of long-term athletic develop- strengthening of the synaptic pathways (148,237,238,241)
mentmodelsindevelopinghumanperformanceorsporting andprovidesanopportunitytotakeadvantageofthemotor
talent (9,10,49,92,142,146), it is vital that practitioners skillpotentialofchildren.Existingmodelsoflong-termath-
acknowledgethattheconstructsoflong-termathleticdevel- leticdevelopmentindicatethattrainingfociduringtheinitial
opment are appropriate for youth of all ages and abilities stages of childhood should be based on the acquisition of
(143). Although a systematic approach to the development rudimentaryandfundamentalmotorskillsinadditiontothe
of athleticism is required to prepare aspiring young athletes development of foundational strength (10,39,143,146).
forthedemandsofsport(69),itisimperativethatallyouth, Although correct execution of fundamental motor skills re-
including those that are inactive, underweight, overweight, quires coordinated sequencing of multimuscle, multijoint,
or obese are afforded the same opportunity to engage in multiplanar movements, there will always be a requirement
dynamic, integrated, and evidence-based training programs for complimentary force production and force attenuation.
that promote the development of both health and skill- Neuromuscular coordination and force production are gov-
related components of fitness (75,143,144,180,182). erned by neural activation and control, and thus it is optimal
to target the development of motor skills and muscular
Performancevs.ParticipationPathways.Despiteexistingmod- strength at a time when the corticospinal tissue in children is
els for the long-term development of athleticism providing highly“plastic”(188).Practitionersshouldnotviewcoordina-
structure and guidance for practitioners, it should be noted tionandmuscularstrengthasseparateentitiesbutrathersyn-
thatanymodelshouldnotbeviewedasastringentblueprint ergistic components of motor skill performance (39) and
that can be superimposed on any participant, within any should therefore seek to develop both qualities during early
environment. Rather, practitioners must ensure that wher- childhood.Althoughyouthshouldengageinmultidimensional
everpossible,long-termtrainingprogramsaretailoredtothe strengthandconditioningprogramsthatusearangeoftraining
needsoftheindividualandwithintheconfinesoftheunique modestodevelopbothhealth-andskill-relatedcomponentsof
demands of the training environment. This is a pertinent fitness,prioritizingneuromusculartrainingthatenhancesboth
factor owing to the highly individualized interaction effects muscularstrengthandmotorskillprowess,startingfromearly
ofgrowthandmaturationonthetrainingresponseofyouth. childhood, is recommended for the long-term physical devel-
Regardless of the model that a child enters, it is imperative opmentof bothchildrenandadolescents(70,75,142).
1494 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 5 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
Forthelong-termenhancementofathleticism,developing tioning as part of a long-term approach to developing
a proficient physical “vocabulary” of fundamental motor athleticism (189).
skillsduringearlychildhoodshouldserveasthefoundations
on which more advanced and complex specific motor skills 4.Long-TermAthleticDevelopmentPathwaysShould
can be later developed (134,142,188). Specifically, funda- EncourageanEarlySportSamplingApproachforYouthThat
mental motor skills encompass the ability to perform loco- PromotesandEnhancesaBroadRangeofMotorSkills
motive, manipulative, and stabilizing movements (149). Sampling refers to an approach that encourages youth to
Complimenting motor skill training with muscular strength engage in a variety of sports or activities and a number of
developmentduringearlychildhoodiscrucialbecausemus- positions within a given sport. Literature has stated that
clestrengthisakeydeterminantofmotorskillfunction(70). a sampling approach does not restrict elite sporting devel-
Muscularstrengthisstronglyassociatedwithamultitudeof opment, but in fact, facilitates longer sporting careers and
physical qualities in youth, for example, speed and power increases the chance of sustained participation in physical
(45). Additionally, enhancing muscular strength using resis- activity (50). Conversely, early specialization refers to the
tance training can improve physical performance conceptofachildparticipatinginyear-roundintensivetrain-
(15,108,141), improve markers of health in obese and over- ingwithinasinglesportorphysicalactivityattheexclusion
weight youth (18,19,229–231,247), and help reduce the risk ofothers(57,265).Concernsexistregardingtheadoptionof
of sports-related injury (172,180,190,256). Thus, a primary anearlyspecializationapproachinyouth,largelybecauseof
aim of long-term athletic development programs should be the inherent associations with increased risk of injury
todevelopresilient,strong,andtechnicallyproficientyouth, (36,78,79,104,119,120,187,192,235), the potential “blunting”
who can robustly maintain motor skill competence within of an individual’s motor skill portfolio (57,144,176,186),
the demands of any sporting or recreational activity. This a reduced standard of performance later in life
philosophy is of particular importance considering recent (28,84,96,174,268),anincreasedriskofovertrainingordrop-
trends in the neuromuscular fitness of youth (44,175,220). out from sport or physical activity (4,35,151,187), and the
A meta-analytical review of 34 training studies showed that nonguarantee of achieving elite-level performance
pre- and early-pubertal youth achieved resistance training- (28,101,174).
induced gains in motor skills that were approximately 50%
greaterthanadolescents(15),thushighlightingtheincreased Effects of Early Specialization on Physical Performance. Irre-
trainabilityofmotorskillsinchildren.Asidefromthedevel- spective of the potential risks associated with early sport
opmentofathleticism,preparatoryconditioninginclusiveof specialization, both children and adolescents are being
motor skillandmuscular strength development provides an encouraged to engage earlier in sports often because of the
appropriate strategy for reducing the relative risk of injury lure of a higher standard of performance, for example,
for youth during sport and physical activity later in life securing national team selection, college scholarships, or
(69,80,111,112,190). Motor skill competence, and indeed professional contracts. The assumption that earlier special-
the perception of motor skill competence, is an important izationwillleadtoenhancedsportsperformancehaslargely
antecedent of physical activity during childhood beendrivenbytheincorrectextrapolationofdataexamining
(42,83,107,135,214,242) and adulthood (140,149). Cumula- the development of expert musicians and the proposed
tively, early engagement in developmentally appropriate “10,000-hour rule” (66). The rule denotes that an individual
training during childhood is warranted for the optimization must acquire 10,000 hours of deliberate practice to attain
ofathleticism,lifelonghealthandwell-being,andthereduc- mastery in a given sport or activity, which could also be
tion of relative risk of injury. viewed as dedicating specific practice to the same sport or
activityfor3hoursadayfor10years.However,inarecent
StartingAge.Althoughthereisnotasinglechronologicalage editorial,itwassuggestedthattheirseminalworkonexpert
at which it isdeemedacceptable for youth toformally start performers had been misinterpreted and that expert perfor-
training, recent guidelines recommended that any child mance had been achieved by some with just 5,000 hours of
engaging in a form of resistance training is emotionally practice (65), which is more reflective of the training vol-
matureenoughtoacceptandfollowdirectionsandpossesses umes reported for actual sports performers (174). Conse-
competent levels of balance and postural control (approxi- quently, practitioners should not subscribe to the
mately 6–7 years of age) (134,141,189). However, children hypothetical 10,000 hours rule, but instead value the quality
shouldengageinexploratoryanddeliberateplayfromearly of practice rather than a specific quantity of practice.
childhood (from birth to the age of 5–6 years) inclusive of The early specialization approach is particularly common
activitiesdesignedtodevelopfundamentalmotorskills(138) when young children display innate talent at a young age,
and foundational levels of strength (e.g., gymnastics or sim- leadingtosignificantothers(e.g.,parentsorcoaches)seeking
ilarbodyweightmanagementactivities)(143).Ifchildrenare achievement by proxy distortion and going beyond normal
ready to engage in organized sports, they are ready to par- ambition for success (251). In contrast, although it may be
ticipate in developmentally appropriate strength and condi- a common view that an accumulation of greater volumes
1495
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 6 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
and intensities of sport-specific practice at a young age will asinglesport(120,200),whereastheweeklytrainingvolume
lead to sporting success, existing data do not support this of16hoursmarksathresholdabovewhichtheriskofinjury
notion, with the number of individuals transitioning from increases (144,187).
entryleveltoelitestandardacrossarangeofsportsinalinear Overexposure to a narrow range of specific movement
fashion remaining small (101). For sports measured in centi- patterns with insufficient rest and recovery and an ensuing
meters,grams,orseconds(e.g.,trackandfield,swimming,or bluntedmotorskillportfolioarecommonlinkstoboththe
weightlifting), later specialization and exposure to lower vol- reduced physical performance and higher risk of injury
umesofspecificpracticeearlierinlifearesignificantdetermi- associated with early sport specialization. By exposing
nants of elite performance in adulthood (174). Despite youth to different sports and activities and adopting
potentialearlyaccomplishments,ingeneral,athleteswhospe- a movement variability approach to motor skill develop-
cialized at an earlier age experienced less success as they ment within different environments, they are less likely to
became older (174). Furthermore, athletes who did achieve chronically overstress specific regions of the musculoskel-
elite sporting success were found to intensify their training etal system, therefore reducing their risk of overuse injury.
toward the end of adolescence, leading to greater volumes Adopting a movement variability philosophy will ensure
oftrainingtowardearlyadulthood.Similarly,adoptingasam- thatthepointofforceapplicationwillconstantlyvary;thus
plingapproachandinvestinginmultiplesportsasopposedto promotingmoreglobalwhole-bodyadaptation,facilitating
specializinginasinglesportproducedimprovedperformance change in coordination, and reducing injury risk (12).
ingrossmotorcoordinationandstandingbroadjumptestsin Regardingphysical performance, developing abroadspec-
10- to 12-year-old boys (84). In addition, the analysis of ret- trumoffundamentalmotorskillswillenablemoreintricate
rospective data across a multitude of sports indicates that and reactive global movements that are inherently wit-
individualswhoparticipatedin 3 sportsormore between 11 nessedinsports,physicalactivity,andfreeplaytobedevel-
and 15 years of age were more likely to play national com- oped (149). Qualified professionals should focus on
paredwithclubstandardsportbetween16and18years(28). developing a wide breadth of movement skills as opposed
to a depth of mastery in a small range of skills to better
Effects of Early Specialization on Injury Risk. The risks of enable the individual to produce effective and efficient
overuse injury seem to increase as a result of early movements in a wide range of environments and to maxi-
specialization due to the repetitive submaximal loading on mize their overall athleticism.
the musculoskeletal system in the absence of sufficient
recoverytimeforsubsequentadaptation(57,239).Forexam- 5.HealthandWell-BeingoftheChildShouldAlwaysBethe
ple,datafromasampleoffemaleyouthathletesshowedthat CentralTenetofLong-TermAthleticDevelopmentPrograms
those who had specialized at an earlier age had a 1.5-fold Health can be defined as “a condition of well-being free of
greater risk of knee-related injury (104). The authors also disease or infirmity and a basic and universal human right”
reported that diagnoses including patellar tendinopathy (227). Huppert et al. (117) defined well-being as a positive
and Osgood-Schlatter disease exhibited a 4-fold increased and sustainable state that enabled an individual, group, or
relative risk in single-sport specialized versus multiple-sport nationtothriveandflourish.Participationinsportshasbeen
athletes (104). In a similar study, data on 1,190 individuals acknowledged as a viable means to promote well-being in
showedthatafteraccountingforageandtimespentplaying youth (59,63,240); however, the International Olympic
sport, sports-specialized training was a significant indepen- Committeestatedthatwhileyouthshouldengageinsports,
dent risk factor for acute and serious overuse injury (120). the process should be both pleasurable and fulfilling to
The increased training volumes associated with early sustain participation and success at all levels (21,177).
specialization are a pertinent injury risk factor for youth Collectively, these philosophies should apply to all forms
(119). For example, high training volumes and competitive of physical activity for youth, inclusive of well-rounded
workloads are strongly associated with an increased risk of strength and conditioning programs (69,196). Irrespective
overuse injury in adolescent baseball pitchers (200). Addi- of whether a child is involved with competitive sports or
tionally,highvolumesofweeklyrunningmileagearesignif- recreational physical activity, health and well-being should
icantlyassociatedwithincreasedriskoflower-limbinjuryin atalltimesbeakeypriorityofanylong-termathletictrain-
adolescent runners (248), whereas a high training volume ing program.
was the most influential risk factor for injury in a cohort of
2,721 high school athletes across a variety of sports (216). PsychosocialFactorsinHealthandWell-Being.Youthshouldbe
Recently, Jayanthi et al. (120) revealed a heightened risk of exposedtopositiveexperiencesthroughsportandphysical
injurywhenyouthparticipatedinmorehoursofsportsprac- activity to maximize well-being. The primary reason that
ticeperweekthantheirnumberofyearsinage,orwhereby childreninitiallyengageinsportandphysicalactivityisfor
theratio oforganized sportsto freeplaytimewasin excess fun, enjoyment, and to experience different activities (2).
of 2:1. Regardless of age, existing data support the notion Similarly, a lack of fun and enjoyment is commonly the
thatyouthshouldnottraininexcessof8monthsperyearin main cause of dropout from sport (32,51). To promote
1496 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 7 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
well-being in youth, practitioners should seek to develop 6.YouthShouldParticipateinPhysicalConditioningThat
(a) a growth mindset, (b) self-determined motivation, (c) HelpsReducetheRiskofInjurytoEnsureTheirOngoing
perceived competence, (d) confidence, and (e) resilience ParticipationinLong-TermAthleticDevelopmentPrograms
(196). Specifically, a growth mindset will foster the belief Although it is impossible to completely eliminate sport- and
that effort, purposeful practice, and guidance from quali- physicalactivity-relatedinjuries,developmentallyappropriate
fied professionals will lead to development and success; training can reduce the relative risks of injury in youth
whileself-determinedmotivationreflectsastateofmindthat (21,74,109,141,190,217,236,245,256). More specifically, when
leads to a child participating in sport or physical activity youth participate in well-rounded strength and conditioning
for its interest, enjoyment, inherent satisfaction, and sense programs,inclusiveofresistancetraining,motorskillandbal-
of challenge (221). Perceived competence is an important ancetraining,speedandagilitytraining,andappropriaterest,
attribute to develop in youth, as it is strongly associated thelikelihoodofexperiencinganinjurycanbereducedbyas
with participation in physical activity (140,214), especially much as 50%(172,256).Thecause of the reduction in injury
during adolescence when the use of social comparison incidence, or injury risk factors, is likely due to improved
among youth and the role of peer support becomes more movement biomechanics, increased muscle strength, and
influential (30,222,223). Confidence is strongly related to enhanced functional abilities (74,110,158,184). From a long-
reduced anxiety, positive emotions, and successful perfor- term athletic development perspective, it is imperative that
mance (260), whereas resilience is defined as the ability of youth,andthosethatareresponsiblefortheirdevelopmental
an individual to retain stability or recover quickly under programming, realize the importance of following strength
significant adverse conditions (137). To enhance well- and conditioning programs that suitably prepare them for
being, qualified professionals should integrate a combina- thedemandsofsportandphysicalactivity.Forexample,early
tionofstrategies,includingtheuseofmentalskilltraining, engagement in neuromuscular training is likely to result in
process-oriented goals, and clear and positive feedback, areducedriskofanteriorcruciateligamentinjurylaterinlife
while maintaining a fun agenda to all sessions. Similarly, infemaleathletes(190).Theauthorsspeculatedthatthisfind-
qualified professionals should foster a training environ- ing was likely attributable to a window of opportunity for
ment in which developmentally appropriate activities are developingsoundmotorskillsandconcomitantstrengthlev-
prescribed,encouragementisreinforced,andwherebytask elsbeforetheonsetofpuberty,whichisknowntobeadevel-
failure is viewed as a positive aspect of the learning opmental stage in which youth experience significant
process. alterationsinmovementbiomechanics(81,113),forceattenu-
ationcapabilities(207),andlower-limbstrengthratios(208).It
Physical Factors in Health and Well-Being. Youth should shouldalsoberecognizedthatsportsparticipationalonedoes
engage in developmentally appropriate, well-rounded not provide a sufficient stimulus to develop high levels of
strengthandconditioningprogramsfromanearlyagethat athleticisminyouth,asmanysportingpracticesfailtoprovide
prioritize a long-term view to the development of athlet- adequate exposure to recommended daily physical activity
icism. Therefore, chronic and sustainable adaptations guidelines (100,136), nor does it allow for individual needs
should be the ultimate goal of youth training provision as tobeaddressedsuchasmuscleimbalancesorreducedranges
opposed to acute gains in performance. Welfare is closely ofmotion (144).
associatedwiththebasichumanrightsofthechildandwill
aidinthepromotionofwell-being(197).Trainingshouldat “Underuse”asaRiskFactorforInjury.Althoughanabundance
all times respect these rights and be commensurate with of existing data support the inclusion of preparatory
the technical competency, training history, and stage of conditioning for young athletes (21,64,123,190,246,256),
growth and development of the child (178). Under no cir- the long-term development of athleticism must also
cumstanceshouldphysicalexertionbeforcedthatcouldbe be viewed as a valuable injury prevention tool for
deemed abusive practice within a youth training program nonathletic youth. Physical inactivity is a major risk factor
(129). Examples may include exercise programs that could for activity-related injuries in children (25,243), and global
be injuriousactivities that arenotin any way beneficial, or statistics indicate that levels of inactivity in modern day
prescriptionthatcouldbeviewedasaform ofpunishment youth remain worryingly high (191,252,254). Intuitively,
(129). Forced physical exertion, prescribed as a form of much like young athletes who are often ill prepared for
physical punishment, can have severe physical consequen- thehighvolumesofsport-specificpracticeandcompetitions,
ces such as thatwhich ledto a12-year-oldboybeinghos- inactive youth are also unlikely to be suitably prepared for
pitalized with exertional rhabdomyolysis (41), a situation thedemandsofcompetitive/recreationalsportsorevengen-
that is unethical and entirely unacceptable. Training pre- eral physical activity. For example, overweight and obese
scription should be balanced with adequate rest to enable youth are twice as likely to suffer an injury during sports
recovery and growth processes to occur and to avoid the or recreational physical activity in comparison with their
risks of accumulated fatigue and associated risks of over- normal weight peers (165). Thus, “underuse” is likely the
training (57,162). most dangerous risk factor for a number of youth, which
1497
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 8 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
highlights the critical importance of appropriately designed fromlargelydiscretecross-sectionalinterventions,andthese
long-term athletic development models. combined data indicate that both children and adolescents
canmakesignificantandworthwhilechangesinmotorskills
Influence of Growth and Maturation on Injury Risk. Current (15,67,98), muscle strength and power (16,68,141), running
dataindicatethattheriskofinjury,inparticulartothelower speed (121,219), agility (122,171), and endurance perfor-
limb, peaks around the time of the adolescent growth spurt mance(5,161,168).Recentdataindicatethatcontinualexpo-
(33,58,113,185,258). During this period of rapid develop- sure to various training methods can benefit both children
ment, there are disproportionate growth rates between and adolescents (125,126,224). Of the longer-term interven-
structural tissues, with bone growing earlier and at a faster tions, 2 years of strength training have produced significant
rate than both muscle and tendon, which lag behind (130). improvements in relative lower-body strength (125), faster
The growth differential between these tissues can lead to change of direction speed (126), and 30-m sprint speed
discomfortandreducedflexibilityaroundjoints(130);how- (224). Despite showing many benefits of strength training
ever,itisthemarkedincreaseinthegrowthrateduringthis onmeasuresofphysicalperformanceinyouth,thesestudies
stageofdevelopment,whichleadstoincreasesinbodymass didnotaccountfortheinfluenceofmaturationorsexonthe
andheightofcenterofmassintheabsenceofcorresponding rate and magnitude of change. Thus, the interaction of
adaptationsinstrengthandpower,whichcanleadtoexces- growth,maturation,andtrainingduringchildhoodandado-
sive loading of the musculoskeletal system during dynamic lescence remains unclear and warrants further research.
and reactive actions (111,130,185,258). For example, the Althoughstrongevidenceindicatesthatworthwhilegains
rapid increases in both stature and body mass in female in physical performance are achieved with strength and
adolescents places them at increased risk of knee injury motorskilldevelopmentalmodels,limitedevidenceisavail-
because of the increased stature developing without con- able relative to the mode of exercise that should be
comitant increases in hip and knee strength (185). The prioritized at specific stages of development. Previous
development of muscular imbalances around the pubertal models of long-term athletic development have promoted
growth spurt is also a viable risk factor, with longitudinal the theory of “windows of opportunity” that provide youth
data in adolescent females showing that hamstring-to- with specific periods in which to train specific components
quadriceps strength ratios decrease from prepubertal to of fitness (10), and failure to train specifically during these
pubertalstages(208).Thismuscleimbalanceisofparticular windows will limit performance capacity later in life (10).
concernaswhenfatigued,bothyoungandadultfemalesuse Althoughthistheoryattemptedtobridgeourunderstanding
alessfavorableactivationstrategy(56,128,167,202),reducing of growth, maturation, and training, this concept has since
their ability to appropriately dissipate aberrant knee loads beenchallengedlargelybecauseofalackofsupportinglon-
indicativeofananteriorcruciateligamentinjurymechanism gitudinal empirical data (82). Combined with the existing
(112,132).Althoughmechanisticdataarerequiredforyoung pediatric training literature, it becomes clear that both chil-
males, recently it has been suggested that the adolescent drenandadolescentscanmakeworthwhileimprovementsin
growthspurtisadevelopmentaltimeframeinwhichtherisk allcomponentsoffitnessirrespectiveoftheirstageofdevel-
oftraumaticinjuryinpubertalmalesisintensified(228,258). opment (69,70,142,143), and consequently long-term train-
Finally,bonemineralizationtypicallylagsbehindlinearbone ingprogramsshouldseektodevelopathleticismthroughout
growth during the pubertal spurt, thus leading to increased the developmental period of childhood and adolescence.
boneporosityandexposingthebonetoaheightenedriskof Although both children and adolescents canmake signif-
fracture (8). Consequently, irrespective of participation in icantimprovementsinvariousphysicalfitnessqualities(e.g.,
competitive sports or noncompetitive recreational physical strength, motor skills, speed, and power), the most effica-
activity, all youth should participate in long-term training cioustrainingmodesusedtoacquiretheseadaptationsmay
programs to promote the level of athleticism required complement the physiological adaptations occurring as
to withstand the physical demands associated with their aresultofgrowthandmaturation,aprocessrecentlytermed
chosen activity and to offset growth- and maturity- “synergistic adaptation” (69,147). Specifically, a meta-
associated risk factors. analysis examining the effects of different training methods
on sprint speed development in male youth showed that
7.Long-TermAthleticDevelopmentProgramsShouldProvide boys who had not reached peak height velocity made the
AllYouthWithaRangeofTrainingModestoEnhanceBoth greatestimprovementsinsprintingafterplyometrictraining,
Health-andSkill-RelatedComponentsofFitness whereas boys who had reached peak height velocity re-
Trainability of Youth.Trainability refers to the responsiveness spondedmorefavorablytocombinedstrengthandplyomet-
of youth to a given training stimulus at various stages of ric training (219). Similar findings were recently reported in
development. As the field of pediatric exercise science con- a 6-week training intervention that showed that both boys
tinuestoevolve,practitionerswillgainagreaterunderstand- who had reached peak height velocity and those who had
ing of how responsive youth are to different modes of notwereabletomakesignificantimprovementsin jumping
training.Ourunderstandingoftrainabilitytypicallyemanates and sprinting after various 6-week resistance training
1498 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 9 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
programs (147). Plyometric training will promote similar of the tests, their associated measurement error, the avail-
neuraladaptationsthatoccurnaturallyasaresultofgrowth ability of time, equipment, and facilities, and the degree of
and maturation before puberty, whereas combined strength thepractitioner’sexpertise.Importantly,practitionersshould
and plyometric training will likely stimulate both select tests that are accurate, reliable, and valid and provide
neural and structural adaptations commonly seen after the meaningful data. Similarly, at all times, it is essential that
pubertal growth spurt. Longitudinal research is now practitionersadheretotheethicsofpediatrictesting,clearly
required to substantiate these claims of synergistic adapta- explain all protocols to both children and parents, and col-
tionandtodetermineoptimaltrainingprescriptionforyouth lectbothparentalconsentandparticipantassentbeforeany
of different stages of development. testing (244,266).
8.PractitionersShouldUseRelevantMonitoringand Monitoring GrowthandMaturation.Because of theinfluence
AssessmentToolsasPartofaLong-TermAthletic of growth and maturation on measures of physical perfor-
DevelopmentStrategy mance(22,261),relativeriskofinjury(81,113,258),andthe
For the welfare and well-being of youth, long-term training propensityforearlymaturingyouthtobeselectedinsports
prescription should be complimented with appropriate teams as a result of the relative age effect (89,93,226), it
monitoring and assessment tools. In the absence of careful seems plausible that practitioners should attempt to mon-
monitoring,youthmaybeatanincreasedriskofexcessively itor physical growth throughout childhood and adoles-
demanding training loads, insufficient opportunities for rest cence. Recent reviews have provided summaries of
and regeneration, or contraindicating training methods existing methods for the identification, or at least estima-
(144). It is suggested that the training of youth should be tion,ofbiologicalmaturation(145,156).Itisacknowledged
monitored by qualified professionals to reduce the risks of that the invasive methods have their own strengths and
excessive training (4,57,177) and accumulated fatigue (106), weaknesses, whereas noninvasive methods of estimating
which in severe cases can lead to nonfunctional overreach- maturity require further validation especially within differ-
ing or overtraining (127,144,162,210). Those personnel ent ethnicities (154,156). Despite the need for further
responsible for the athletic development of youth should research, it is recommended that where practitioners are
adopt a coordinated approach to the monitoring process. working with youth for a prolonged period, quarterly as-
Wherever possible, qualified professionals should also sessmentsof stature, limb length, and bodymass are taken
attempt to educate children and their parents and raise to allow the analysis of growth curves. This information
awarenessoftherisksandsymptomsofnonfunctionalover- can be collected and provide practitioners with relevant
reaching and related injuries or illnesses. The child and pa- information to help explain fluctuations in performance
rentsshouldalsounderstandtherolesofbasicself-reporting andaidintheidentificationofyouthwhoareexperiencing
monitoring strategies (sleep patterns, nutritional behavior, rapidgrowth,whichmaypotentiallyplacethem“atrisk”of
and physical activity exposure outside the training environ- growth-related injury (145).
ment) and the potential impact of appropriate remedial
strategies. Monitoring Physical Performance. There are a myriad of
Qualified professionals will typically use monitoring and existingtestprotocolsforassessingphysicalcapacities,such
assessment tools to determine training for effectiveness, to as muscle strength and power (72,73,86,141,173), running
aid in program design, determining mechanisms of adapta- speed (170,218), aerobic capacity (6,11,263), or motor skill
tion,toinstillmotivationwithinthechildoradolescent,orto competency(46,47,60),andpractitionersshouldadoptthose
obtain further knowledge and understanding about the that are most viable for their particular environment. For
physiological demands of a sport or physical activity. example, it may be feasible for practitioners within elite
However, various testing and assessment strategies are also youth sports teams to assess kinetics and kinematics using
usedforthepurposesoftalentidentification(204).Although force plate diagnostics and motion capture systems (184),
agoalofidentifyingfuturepotentialtalentisperhapsappeal- whereas a primary school teacher may only be able to test
ing, the process of identifying and subjectively selecting tal- a child’sperformanceona standing broad jump (7) andcol-
ent from a very early age typically favors early maturing, lect some data on how subjectively difficult training sessions
while excluding later maturing youth (31,43,91,164,225). were by using a child-modified version of the rating scale of
Additionally, a comprehensive talent identification process perceived exertion (99). Both scenarios are likely to provide
is often time-consuming and expensive, and, crucially, the valuableinformationrelatedtoathleticdevelopmentandsub-
success rate of identified children transferring through to sequent training prescription. Qualified professionals should
elite-level adult sport is questionable (255). appreciate that when assessing physical capacities in youth,
Althoughawealthofmonitoringandassessmenttoolsare itisimportanttovalueboththeprocessofperformance(i.e.,
available for practitioners, the number and sophistication of how technically proficient an individual performs a jumping
tools included within any long-term athletic development movement)andtheproductof performance(i.e.,howfardo
programshouldbedependentontheefficacyandrelevance they jump).
1499
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 10 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
Monitoring Psychosocial Well-Being. Although practitioners sures of academic work, and the need for socializing with
may instinctively focus on assessing and monitoring meas- family and friends.
uresofphysicalperformance,fortheholisticdevelopmentof
youth, it is imperative that consideration also be given to Challenges Associated With Programming for Youth. Periodiza-
psychosocial well-being (197). Various tools for monitoring tion represents the theoretical framework for developing
well-being have been reported in the literature; a modified a training program (203) and involves planning sequential
versionoftheProfileofMoodStatesquestionnairehaspre- blocksoftrainingtomaximizetheoveralltrainingresponse.
viouslybeenshowntobeavalidtoolforassessingmoodin However,intheeventofinsufficienttimeallowanceforrest
adolescents(249);therecovery-stressquestionnairehasbeen and recovery, fatigue will accumulate and potentially lead
used to identify nonfunctional overreaching in youth (29); to nonfunctional overreaching or in extreme cases, over-
the acute recovery and stress scale has been shown to be training, or burnout (169). Fatigue management and the
a sensitive and valid tool to monitor recovery stress imbal- prevention of overtraining are recognized as key determi-
ances(131),whereasresearchersrecentlyshowedhowasim- nants of successful programming (206), and the long-term
ple well-being questionnaire (166) was able to detect development of athleticism in youth is predicated by bal-
perceived well-being in a group of adolescents (199). The ancing exposure to training with sufficient time for rest,
well-being questionnaire consists of 5 key items (fatigue, recovery,andgrowth.Muchlikeinadults,failuretoaccom-
sleep quality, general muscle soreness, stress levels, and modate for periods of rest will undoubtedly make children
mood) in which youth provide a score on a rating scale of moresusceptibletothenegativeconsequencesofovertrain-
1(leastpositiveresponse)to5(mostpositiveresponse)in0.5 ing oroveruse injury(36,162).Planning forrestandrecov-
increments (166,199). Although psychosocial well-being is ery to enable natural growth processes to occur is a key
multifactorial, it is suggested that practitioners use some moderatorthatdifferentiatesyouthprogrammingfromthat
form of monitoring system to help identify youth who are of adults.
potentially “at risk” of low well-being and to ensure that Thechallengeof balancingtrainingstimuliwith recovery
children and adolescents remain motivated to participate time becomes even more difficult where youth are engaged
insportsorphysicalactivity.Wherepractitionersareunable in multiple sports or activities in successive seasons (e.g.,
to directly monitor or record data, they should have an a fall, a winter, and a summer sport), or play for multiple
awareness of the warning signs of reduced well-being. For teamswithinasingleseason(e.g.,youthwhoplaysoccerat
example, Matos et al. (162) identified the following as the club, regional, and national levels). Dismissing the need for
most prevalent symptoms of overtraining in youth: loss of adequate rest and recovery blocks will likely predispose
appetite, increased frequency of injury, frequent tiredness, youthtodecrementsin physicalandpsychologicalfunction
inability to cope with training loads, frequent respiratory (36). Therefore, when designing programs, practitioners
infections, heavy and stiff muscles, and disrupted sleep should prescribe rest and recovery periods as mandatory
patterns. blocks of the overall training plan, irrespective of pressures
fromsportscoachesorparents.Tooptimizephysicaldevel-
9.PractitionersWorkingWithYouthShouldSystematically opment and minimize accumulated fatigue, practitioners
ProgressandIndividualizeTrainingProgramsforSuccessful should also consider the scheduling of training vs. compet-
Long-TermAthleticDevelopment itions. For young children entering a long-term athletic
When working within a long-term athletic development development pathway, researchers suggest that a large pro-
pathway, it is imperative wherever possible, for qualified portion of time should be devoted to general preparatory
professionals to adopt a progressive, individualized, and trainingwithafocusondevelopmentoffundamentalmove-
integrated approach to the programming of strength and ment skills and foundational strength; then, as children be-
conditioning activities. Regardless of whether a practitioner comesolder,agreateramountoftimecouldthenbedevoted
is working with an overweight prepubertal boy who is totheirchosensportorphysicalactivity(103).Practitioners
re-engaging with physical activity, or a talented adolescent should also be cognizant of the risks associated with pro-
girl with 8 years of high-quality training experience, there longed competitions and the amount of rest between, and
should be a clear goal commensurate with the needs of the leadingupto,competition(187).Intensivecompetitionslast-
individual. Although existing athletic development models ing6hoursormorewithinsufficientrestareariskfactorfor
provide generic guidelines for qualified professionals to injury (27); however, researchers also advocate that in the
consider for the long-term development of athleticism eventofmultiplecompetitionstakingplaceonthesameday,
(142,143),theprocessofdesigning,implementing,andrefin- youth should be allowed adequate and predetermined rest
ingyouthtrainingprogramsshouldbedictatedbytheneeds intervalsbetweenrepeatedboutsofactivity(20).Inthelead
oftheindividual,theirtechnicalcompetency,andtheneeds uptoasportingevent,ithasalsobeensuggestedthatyouth
oftherelevantsportsoractivities.Also,programdesignand shouldbeaffordedatleast48hoursofrestbeforeacompe-
delivery should accommodate for other influential factors titionandbeencouragedtosleepforlongerthan7hoursper
suchasthetimeandfacilitiesavailablefortraining,thepres- night (150) because of the negative effects of insufficient
1500 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 11 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
sleep on health, learning, and physical performance to provide guidance and feedback to teach basic motor
(21,34,90). patterns, in most instances a combination of visual demon-
stration with concise external cues should be prioritized to
Influence of Growth and Maturation on Programming. Because maximize the learning and feedback processes (17,94).
development in youth occurs in a nonlinear fashion, practi- Recent evidence shows the benefits of using external as
tioners need to be flexible and responsive to interindividual opposed to internal cues in the performance of rotational
variations in the timing, tempo, and magnitude of physical jumpingtechniquesinyounggymnasts(1),withresearchers
maturation, differences in psychosocial maturation, and suggesting that attentional focus is improved when using
differences in rates and styles of learning. For example, externallyorientedcueing.Effectivemanagementofchildren
during the growth spurt, a child may experience temporary andadolescents,eitherwithinacompetitivesportingorrec-
disruption in motor control and whole-body coordination, reational physical activity environment, will also require
commonly termed “adolescent awkwardness” (205,209). In clear and well-prepared session structures (144), effective
suchaninstance,practitionersmayneedtoadjustthetrain- use of instruction (97), behavior management strategies
ingprogrambyprescribingopportunitiestomodifyexisting (213), use of empowerment, varied use of projection and
motor patterns with reduced loadings (145). This scenario tone of voice, and a teaching style that inspires youth to
highlightstheimportanceofqualifiedprofessionalsworking continually engage in a lifetime of physical activity.
withyouthtonotonlypossessasoundunderstandingofthe SUMMARY
training process and an ability to observe and correct tech-
nique but also an understanding of key pediatric exercise Itisclearthatthefieldoflong-termathleticdevelopmenthas
science principles. progressed over recent years; however, owing to the current
lack of longitudinal and well-controlled empirical studies,
10.QualifiedProfessionalsandSoundPedagogical furtherresearchisrequired.Specifically,abetterunderstanding
ApproachesAreFundamentaltotheSuccessofLong-Term ofthetrainingprocessinyouth,themannerinwhichtraining
AthleticDevelopmentPrograms interacts with growth and maturation, and how long-term
Althoughaclearunderstandingofpediatricexercisescience approachestoathleticdevelopmentinfluencephysicalperfor-
and training principles are fundamental to the long-term mance,healthandwell-being,andinjuryriskarekeyareasthat
development of athleticism in youth, a strong grounding in require further study. This new research is also required to
pedagogy and coaching skills is also a necessity for the validateexistingpracticesamongqualifiedprofessionalsandto
practitioner to effectively communicate and interact with ensure that youth are provided with evidence-based practice
youth of all ages and abilities (71,142,144). Practitioners at all times. All youth should be afforded training programs
shouldbeabletocallonawiderangeofteachingstrategies commensuratewiththeirindividualneeds,whichfosterafun
to ensure that all youth are exposed to mentally engaging and motivational training environment. However, above all
and physically challenging training programs that foster else, it isimperative that qualified professionals adhere to the
a motivational climate and inspire holistic development wordsofPresidentFranklinD.Rooseveltandhelptobuildour
from both a physical and psychosocial perspective. The youth for a lifelong future of healthy and enjoyable engage-
abilitytopromoteamotivationallearningclimate,inwhich mentinsportsandphysicalactivity.
allyouthareabletoparticipateinavarietyofdevelopmen-
tally appropriate activities, engage in personal reflection, REFERENCES
experience success, and enhance competence (102), is an
1. Abdollahipour,R,Wulf,G,Psotta,R,andPalomoNieto,M.
essentialtoolforpractitionerstomaximizethedevelopment Performanceofgymnasticsskillbenefitsfromanexternalfocusof
of athleticism. From a holistic perspective, practitioners attention.JSportsSci33:1807–1813,2015.
shouldseektopromoteintrinsicmotivationinyouthasthis 2. Allender,S,Cowburn,G,andFoster,C.Understandingparticipation
insportandphysicalactivityamongchildrenandadults:Areviewof
willencourageachildoradolescenttobeinterestedinpar-
qualitativestudies.HealthEducRes21:826–835,2006.
ticipating, improving, and developing skills, while also
3. Alvarez-SanEmeterio,C,Antunano,NP,Lopez-Sobaler,AM,and
reducing the risk of youth being solely driven by external Gonzalez-Badillo,JJ.Effectofstrengthtrainingandthepracticeof
rewards, such as trophies or scholarships. Cultivating an Alpineskiingonbonemassdensity,growth,bodycomposition,
andthestrengthandpowerofthelegsofadolescentskiers.J
environment that promotes intrinsic motivation and enjoy-
StrengthCondRes25:2879–2890,2011.
ment while minimizing the negative effects of stress will
4. AmericanAcademyofPediatricsCouncilonSportsMedicine.
result in the best outcome for youth who need to learn
Intensivetrainingandsportsspecializationinyoungathletes.
and understand thatsuccessful performance emanates from Pediatrics106:154–157,2000.
effort, hard work, and desire (26,124,232–234). 5. Armstrong,NandBarker,AR.Endurancetrainingandeliteyoung
Within the motivational climate, practitioners should athletes.MedSportSci56:59–83,2011.
demonstrate, explain, cue, and modify exercises in a devel- 6. Armstrong,NandWelsman,JR.Assessment:Aerobicfitness.In:
PaediatricExerciseScienceandMedicine(2nded.).N.Armstrongand
opmentally appropriate manner. Although in the initial
W.VanMechelen,eds.Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress,2008.pp.
stages of developing athleticism, a practitioner may need 97–108.
1501
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 12 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
7. Artero,EG,Espana-Romero,V,Castro-Pinero,J,Ruiz,J,Jimenez- 24. Biddle,SJandAsare,M.Physicalactivityandmentalhealthin
Pavon,D,Aparicio,V,Gatto-Cardia,M,Baena,P,Vicente- childrenandadolescents:Areviewofreviews.BrJSportsMed45:
Rodriguez,G,Castillo,MJ,andOrtega,FB.Criterion-related 886–895,2011.
validityoffield-basedmuscularfitnesstestsinyouth.JSportsMed
25. Bloemers,F,Collard,D,Paw,MC,VanMechelen,W,Twisk,J,
PhysFitness52:263–272,2012.
andVerhagen,E.Physicalinactivityisariskfactorforphysical
8. Bailey,DA,Wedge,JH,McCulloch,RG,Martin,AD,and activity-relatedinjuriesinchildren.BrJSportsMed46:669–674,
Bernhardson,SC.Epidemiologyoffracturesofthedistalendofthe 2012.
radiusinchildrenasassociatedwithgrowth.JBoneJointSurgAm 26. Breiger,J,Cumming,SP,Smith,RE,andSmoll,F.Winning,
71:1225–1231,1989. motivationalclimate,andyoungathletes’competitiveexperiences:
9. Bailey,RandMorley,D.Towardsamodeloftalentdevelopment Somenotablesexdifferences.IntJSportsSciCoach10:395–411,
inphysicaleducation.SportEducSoc11:211–230,2006. 2015.
10. Balyi,IandHamilton,A.Long-termathletedevelopment: 27. Brenner,JS;AmericanAcademyofPediatricsCouncilonSports
Trainabilityinchildhoodandadolescence.Windowsofopportunity. Medicine,andFitness.Overuseinjuries,overtraining,andburnout
Optimaltrainability.Victoria,BritishColumbia,Canada: inchildandadolescentathletes.Pediatrics119:1242–1245,2007.
NationalCoachingInstitute&AdvancedTrainingand 28. Bridge,MWandToms,MR.Thespecialisingorsamplingdebate:
Performance,2004. Aretrospectiveanalysisofadolescentsportsparticipationinthe
11. Barker,AR,Williams,CA,Jones,AM,andArmstrong,N. UK.JSportsSci31:87–96,2013.
Establishingmaximaloxygenuptakeinyoungpeopleduring 29. Brink,MS,Visscher,C,Coutts,AJ,andLemmink,KA.Changesin
arampcycletesttoexhaustion.BrJSportsMed45:498–503,2011. perceivedstressandrecoveryinoverreachedyoungelitesoccer
12. Bartlett,R,Wheat,J,andRobins,M.Ismovementvariability players.ScandJMedSciSports22:285–292,2012.
importantforsportsbiomechanists?.SportsBiomech6:224–243, 30. Buhrmester,DandFurman,W.Thedevelopmentof
2007. companionshipandintimacy.ChildDev58:1101–1113,1987.
13. Bass,SL.Theprepubertalyears:Auniquelyopportunestageof 31. Burgess,DJandNaughton,GA.Talentdevelopmentinadolescent
growthwhentheskeletonismostresponsivetoexercise?.Sports teamsports:Areview.IntJSportsPhysiolPerform5:103–116,2010.
Med30:73–78,2000.
32. Butcher,J,Lindner,KJ,andJohn,DP.Withdrawalfrom
14. Baxter-Jones,ADG,Eisenmann,JC,andSherar,LB.Controlling competitiveyouthsport:Aretrospectiveten-yearstudy.JSport
formaturationinpediatricexercisescience.PediatrExercSci17: Behav25:145–163,2002.
18–30,2005.
33. Caine,D,Maffulli,N,andCaine,C.Epidemiologyofinjuryinchild
15. Behringer,M,VomHeede,A,Matthews,M,andMester,J. andadolescentsports:Injuryrates,riskfactors,andprevention.
Effectsofstrengthtrainingonmotorperformanceskillsin ClinSportsMed27:19–50,2008;vii.
childrenandadolescents:Ameta-analysis.PediatrExercSci23:
34. Carskadon,MA.Sleepandcircadianrhythmsinchildrenand
186–206,2011.
adolescents:Relevanceforathleticperformanceofyoungpeople.
16. Behringer,M,VomHeede,A,Yue,Z,andMester,J.Effectsof ClinSportsMed24:319–328,2005;x.
resistancetraininginchildrenandadolescents:Ameta-analysis.
35. Carter,CWandMicheli,LJ.Trainingthechildathletefor
Pediatrics126:e1199–e1210,2010.
prevention,healthpromotion,andperformance:Howmuchis
17. Benjaminse,A,Gokeler,A,Dowling,AV,Faigenbaum,A, enough,howmuchistoomuch?.ClinSportsMed30:679–690,
Ford,KR,Hewett,TE,Onate,JA,Otten,B,andMyer,GD. 2011.
Optimizationoftheanteriorcruciateligamentinjury
36. Carter,CWandMicheli,LJ.Trainingthechildathlete:Physical
preventionparadigm:Novelfeedbacktechniquestoenhance
fitness,healthandinjury.BrJSportsMed45:880–885,2011.
motorlearningandreduceinjuryrisk.JOrthopSportsPhysTher
45:170–182,2015. 37. Casey,BJ,Giedd,JN,andThomas,KM.Structuralandfunctional
braindevelopmentanditsrelationtocognitivedevelopment.Biol
18. Benson,AC,Torode,ME,andFiataroneSingh,MA.Theeffectof
Psychol54:241–257,2000.
high-intensityprogressiveresistancetrainingonadiposityin
children:Arandomizedcontrolledtrial.IntJObes(Lond)32: 38. Casey,BJ,Tottenham,N,Liston,C,andDurston,S.Imagingthe
1016–1027,2008. developingbrain:Whathavewelearnedaboutcognitive
development?.TrendsCognSci9:104–110,2005.
19. Benson,AC,Torode,ME,andFiataroneSingh,MA.Effectsof
resistancetrainingonmetabolicfitnessinchildrenandadolescents: 39. Cattuzzo,MT,DosSantosHenrique,R,Re,AH,deOliveira,IS,
Asystematicreview.ObesRev9:43–66,2008. Melo,BM,deSousaMoura,M,deAraujo,RC,andStodden,D.
Motorcompetenceandhealthrelatedphysicalfitnessinyouth:A
20. Bergeron,MF,Laird,MD,Marinik,EL,Brenner,JS,and
systematicreview.JSciMedSport19:123–129,2016.
Waller,JL.Repeated-boutexerciseintheheatinyoungathletes:
Physiologicalstrainandperceptualresponses.JApplPhysiol(1985) 40. Ceschia,A,Giacomini,S,Santarossa,S,Rugo,M,Salvadego,D,Da
106:476–485,2009. Ponte,A,Driussi,C,Mihaleje,M,Poser,S,andLazzer,S.
Deleteriouseffectsofobesityonphysicalfitnessinpre-pubertal
21. Bergeron,MF,Mountjoy,M,Armstrong,N,Chia,M,Cote,J,
children.EurJSportSci16:1–8,2015.
Emery,CA,Faigenbaum,A,Hall,GJr,Kriemler,S,Leglise,M,
Malina,RM,Pensgaard,AM,Sanchez,A,Soligard,T, 41. Clarkson,PM.Casereportofexertionalrhabdomyolysisin
Sundgot-Borgen,J,vanMechelen,W,Weissensteiner,JR,and a12-year-oldboy.MedSciSportsExerc38:197–200,2006.
Engebretsen,L.InternationalOlympicCommitteeconsensus 42. Cliff,DP,Okely,AD,Morgan,PJ,Jones,RA,Steele,JR,and
statementonyouthathleticdevelopment.BrJSportsMed49:843– Baur,LA.Proficiencydeficiency:Masteryoffundamental
851,2015. movementskillsandskillcomponentsinoverweightandobese
22. Beunen,GPandMalina,RM.Growthandbiologicalmaturation: children.Obesity(SilverSpring)20:1024–1033,2012.
Relevancetoathleticperformance.In:TheYoungAthlete.H. 43. Cobley,S,Baker,J,Wattie,N,andMcKenna,J.Annualage-
HebestreitandO.Bar-Or,eds.Oxford:BlackwellPublishing,2008. groupingandathletedevelopment:Ameta-analyticalreviewof
pp.3–17. relativeageeffectsinsport.SportsMed39:235–256,2009.
23. Beunen,GP,Rogol,AD,andMalina,RM.Indicatorsofbiological 44. Cohen,DD,Voss,C,Taylor,MJ,Delextrat,A,Ogunleye,AA,and
maturationandsecularchangesinbiologicalmaturation.FoodNutr Sandercock,GR.Ten-yearsecularchangesinmuscularfitnessin
Bull27:S244–S256,2006. Englishchildren.ActaPaediatr100:e175–e177,2011.
1502 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 13 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
45. Comfort,P,Stewart,A,Bloom,L,andClarkson,B. controlledtrialtargetingobjectcontrolproficiency.ChildCare
Relationshipsbetweenstrength,sprint,andjumpperformancein HealthDev41:1179–1187,2015.
well-trainedyouthsoccerplayers.J StrengthCondRes28:173–
61. Dotan,R,Mitchell,C,Cohen,R,Gabriel,D,Klentrou,P,and
177,2014.
Falk,B.Child-adultdifferencesinthekineticsoftorque
46. Cools,W,DeMartelaer,K,Vandaele,B,Samaey,C,and development.JSportsSci31:945–953,2013.
Andries,C.Assessmentofmovementskillperformancein
62. Dotan,R,Mitchell,C,Cohen,R,Klentrou,P,Gabriel,D,and
preschoolchildren:ConvergentvaliditybetweenMOT4-6and
Falk,B.Child-adultdifferencesinmuscleactivation–areview.
M-ABC.JSportsSciMed9:597–604,2010.
PediatrExercSci24:2–21,2012.
47. Cools,W,Martelaer,KD,Samaey,C,andAndries,C.Movement
63. Eime,RM,Young,JA,Harvey,JT,Charity,MJ,andPayne,WR.A
skillassessmentoftypicallydevelopingpreschoolchildren:A
systematicreviewofthepsychologicalandsocialbenefitsof
reviewofsevenmovementskillassessmenttools.JSportsSciMed8:
participationinsportforchildrenandadolescents:Informing
154–168,2009.
developmentofaconceptualmodelofhealththroughsport.IntJ
48. Corder,K,vanSluijs,EM,Ridgway,CL,Steele,RM,Prynne,CJ, BehavNutrPhysAct10:98,2013.
Stephen,AM,Bamber,DJ,Dunn,VJ,Goodyer,IM,and
64. Emery,CAandMeeuwisse,WH.Theeffectivenessof
Ekelund,U.Breakfastconsumptionandphysicalactivityin
aneuromuscularpreventionstrategytoreduceinjuriesinyouth
adolescents:Dailyassociationsandhourlypatterns.AmJClinNutr
soccer:Acluster-randomisedcontrolledtrial.BrJSportsMed44:
99:361–368,2014.
555–562,2010.
49. Coˆte´,J,Baker,J,andAbernethy,B.Practicetoplayinthe
65. Ericsson,KA.Traininghistory,deliberatepracticeandelitesports
developmentofsportexpertise.In:HandbookofSportPsychology.R.
performance:AnanalysisinresponsetoTuckerandCollinsreview–
EklundandG.Tenenbaum,eds.Hoboken,NJ:Wiley,2007.pp.
whatmakeschampions?.BrJSportsMed47:533–535,2013.
184–202.
66. Ericsson,KA,Krampe,RT,andTesch-Ro¨mer,C.Theroleof
50. Coˆte´,J,Lidor,R,andHackfort,D.ISSPpositionstand:Tosample
deliberatepracticeintheacquisitionofexpertperformance.Psychol
ortospecialize?Sevenpostulatesaboutyouthsportactivitiesthat
Rev100:363–406,1993.
leadtocontinuedparticipationandeliteperformance.IntJSport
ExercPsychol9:7–17,2009. 67. Faigenbaum,AD,Farrell,A,Fabiano,M,Radler,T,Naclerio,F,
Ratamess,NA,Kang,J,andMyer,GD.Effectsofintegrative
51. Crane,JandTemple,V.Asystematicreviewofdropoutfrom
neuromusculartrainingonfitnessperformanceinchildren.Pediatr
organizedsportamongchildrenandyouth.EurPhysEducRev21:
ExercSci23:573–584,2011.
114–131,2015.
68. Faigenbaum,AD,Kraemer,WJ,Blimkie,CJ,Jeffreys,I,
52. Cuenca-Garcia,M,Ruiz,JR,Ortega,FB,Labayen,I,Gonzalez-
Micheli,LJ,Nitka,M,andRowland,TW.Youthresistance
Gross,M,Moreno,LA,Gomez-Martinez,S,Ciarapica,D,
training:Updatedpositionstatementpaperfromthenational
Hallstrom,L,Wastlund,A,Molnar,D,Gottrand,F,Manios,Y,
strengthandconditioningassociation.JStrengthCondRes23:
Widhalm,K,Kafatos,A,DeHenauw,S,Sjostrom,M,Castillo,MJ,
S60–S79,2009.
andGroup,HS.Associationofbreakfastconsumptionwith
objectivelymeasuredandself-reportedphysicalactivity,sedentary 69. Faigenbaum,AD,Lloyd,RS,MacDonald,J,andMyer,GD.Citius,
timeandphysicalfitnessinEuropeanadolescents:TheHELENA Altius,Fortius:Beneficialeffectsofresistancetrainingforyoung
(healthylifestyleinEuropebynutritioninadolescence)study. athletes.BrJSportsMed50:3–7,2016.
PublicHealthNutr17:2226–2236,2014.
70. Faigenbaum,AD,Lloyd,RS,andMyer,GD.Youthresistance
53. Cunningham,DJ,West,DJ,Owen,NJ,Shearer,DA,Finn,CV, training:Pastpractices,newperspectives,andfuturedirections.
Bracken,RM,Crewther,BT,Scott,P,Cook,CJ,andKilduff,LP. PediatrExercSci25:591–604,2013.
Strengthandpowerpredictorsofsprintingperformancein
71. Faigenbaum,AD,Lloyd,RS,Sheehan,D,andMyer,GD.Therole
professionalrugbyplayers.JSportsMedPhysFitness53:105–111,
ofthepediatricexercisespecialistintreatingexercisedeficit
2013.
disorderinyouth.StrengthCondJ35:34–41,2013.
54. D’Hondt,E,Deforche,B,Gentier,I,DeBourdeaudhuij,I,
72. Faigenbaum,AD,McFarland,JE,Herman,RE,Naclerio,F,
Vaeyens,R,Philippaerts,R,andLenoir,M.Alongitudinalanalysis
Ratamess,NA,Kang,J,andMyer,GD.Reliabilityoftheone-
ofgrossmotorcoordinationinoverweightandobesechildren
repetition-maximumpowercleantestinadolescentathletes.J
versusnormal-weightpeers.IntJObes(Lond)37:61–67,2013.
StrengthCondRes26:432–437,2012.
55. D’Hondt,E,Deforche,B,Vaeyens,R,Vandorpe,B,
73. Faigenbaum,AD,Milliken,LA,andWestcott,WL.Maximal
Vandendriessche,J,Pion,J,Philippaerts,R,deBourdeaudhuij,I,
strengthtestinginhealthychildren.JStrengthCondRes17:162–
andLenoir,M.Grossmotorcoordinationinrelationtoweight
166,2003.
statusandagein5-to12-year-oldboysandgirls:Across-sectional
study.IntJPediatrObes6:e556–e564,2011. 74. Faigenbaum,ADandMyer,GD.Resistancetrainingamongyoung
athletes:Safety,efficacyandinjurypreventioneffects.BrJSports
56. DeSteCroix,MB,Priestley,AM,Lloyd,RS,andOliver,JL.ACL
Med44:56–63,2010.
injuryriskinelitefemaleyouthsoccer:Changesinneuromuscular
controlofthekneefollowingsoccer-specificfatigue.ScandJMed 75. Faigenbaum,ADandMyer,GD.Exercisedeficitdisorderin
SciSports25:e531–e538,2015. youth:Playnoworpaylater.CurrSportsMedRep11:196–200,
2012.
57. DiFiori,JP,Benjamin,HJ,Brenner,J,Gregory,A,Jayanthi,N,
Landry,GL,andLuke,A.Overuseinjuriesandburnoutinyouth 76. Faigenbaum,AD,Stracciolini,A,andMyer,GD.Exercisedeficit
sports:ApositionstatementfromtheAmericanMedicalSociety disorderinyouth:Ahiddentruth.ActaPaediatr100:1423–1425,
forSportsMedicine.ClinJSportMed24:3–20,2014. 2011;discussion1425.
58. DiFiori,JP,Puffer,JC,Aish,B,andDorey,F.Wristpaininyoung 77. Falk,B,Usselman,C,Dotan,R,Brunton,L,Klentrou,P,Shaw,J,
gymnasts:Frequencyandeffectsupontrainingover1year.ClinJ andGabriel,D.Child-adultdifferencesinmusclestrengthand
SportMed12:348–353,2002. activationpatternduringisometricelbowflexionandextension.
ApplPhysiolNutrMetab34:609–615,2009.
59. Donaldson,SJandRonan,KR.Theeffectsofsportsparticipation
onyoungadolescents’emotionalwell-being.Adolescence41:369– 78. Feeley,BT,Agel,J,andLaPrade,RF.Whenisittooearlyforsingle
389,2006. sportspecialization?.AmJSportsMed,2015.
60. Donath,L,Faude,O,Hagmann,S,Roth,R,andZahner,L. 79. Ferguson,BandStern,PJ.Acaseofearlysportsspecializationinan
Fundamentalmovementskillsinpreschoolers:Arandomized adolescentathlete.JCanChiroprAssoc58:377–383,2014.
1503
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 14 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
80. Ford,KR,Myer,GD,andHewett,TE.Valguskneemotionduring 98. Granacher,U,Muehlbauer,T,Doerflinger,B,Strohmeier,R,and
landinginhighschoolfemaleandmalebasketballplayers.MedSci Gollhofer,A.Promotingstrengthandbalanceinadolescents
SportsExerc35:1745–1750,2003. duringphysicaleducation:Effectsofashort-termresistance
training.JStrengthCondRes25:940–949,2011.
81. Ford,KR,Shapiro,R,Myer,GD,VanDenBogert,AJ,and
Hewett,TE.Longitudinalsexdifferencesduringlandinginknee 99. Groslambert,A,Hintzy,F,Hoffman,MD,Dugue,B,and
abductioninyoungathletes.MedSciSportsExerc42:1923–1931, Rouillon,JD.Validationofaratingscaleofperceivedexertionin
2010. youngchildren.IntJSportsMed22:116–119,2001.
82. Ford,P,DeSteCroix,M,Lloyd,R,Meyers,R,Moosavi,M, 100. Guagliano,JM,Rosenkranz,RR,andKolt,GS.Girls’physical
Oliver,J,Till,K,andWilliams,C.Thelong-termathlete activitylevelsduringorganizedsportsinAustralia.MedSciSports
developmentmodel:Physiologicalevidenceandapplication.J Exerc45:116–122,2013.
SportsSci29:389–402,2011. 101. Gulbin,J,Weissensteiner,J,Oldenziel,K,andGagne,F.Patternsof
83. Fransen,J,Deprez,D,Pion,J,Tallir,IB,D’Hondt,E,Vaeyens,R, performancedevelopmentineliteathletes.EurJSportSci13:605–
Lenoir,M,andPhilippaerts,RM.Changesinphysicalfitnessand 614,2013.
sportsparticipationamongchildrenwithdifferentlevelsofmotor 102. Gutierrez,MandRuiz,LM.Perceivedmotivationalclimate,
competence:A2-yearlongitudinalstudy.PediatrExercSci26:11– sportsmanship,andstudents’attitudestowardphysicaleducation
21,2014. classesandteachers.PerceptMotSkills108:308–326,2009.
84. Fransen,J,Pion,J,Vandendriessche,J,Vandorpe,B,Vaeyens,R, 103. Haff,GG.Periodizationstrategiesforyouthdevelopment.In:
Lenoir,M,andPhilippaerts,RM.Differencesinphysicalfitness StrengthandConditioningforYoungAthletes:ScienceandApplication.
andgrossmotorcoordinationinboysaged6-12yearsspecializing R.S.LloydandJ.L.Oliver,eds.Oxford,UnitedKingdom:
inoneversussamplingmorethanonesport.JSportsSci30:379– Routledge,2013.pp.149–168.
386,2012.
104. Hall,R,BarberFoss,K,Hewett,TE,andMyer,GD.Sport
85. Fraser-Thomas,J,Cote,J,andDeakin,J.Examiningadolescent specialization’sassociationwithanincreasedriskofdeveloping
sportdropoutandprolongedengagementfromadevelopmental anteriorkneepaininadolescentfemaleathletes.JSportRehabil24:
perspective.JApplSportPsychol20:318–333,2008. 31–35,2015.
86. Fry,AC,Irwin,CC,Nicoll,JX,andFerebee,DE.Muscularstrength 105. Hallal,PC,Andersen,LB,Bull,FC,Guthold,R,Haskell,W,and
andpowerin3-7yearoldchildren.PediatrExercSci27:345–354, Ekelund,U;LancetPhysicalActivitySeriesWorkingG.Global
2015. physicalactivitylevels:Surveillanceprogress,pitfalls,and
87. Fuchs,RK,Bauer,JJ,andSnow,CM.Jumpingimproveshipand prospects.Lancet380:247–257,2012.
lumbarspinebonemassinprepubescentchildren:Arandomized 106. Halson,SL.Monitoringtrainingloadtounderstandfatiguein
controlledtrial.JBoneMinerRes16:148–156,2001. athletes.SportsMed44(Suppl.2):S139–S147,2014.
88. Fuchs,RKandSnow,CM.Gainsinhipbonemassfromhigh- 107. Hardy,LL,Reinten-Reynolds,T,Espinel,P,Zask,A,and
impacttrainingaremaintained:Arandomizedcontrolledtrialin Okely,AD.Prevalenceandcorrelatesoflowfundamental
children.JPediatr141:357–362,2002. movementskillcompetencyinchildren.Pediatrics130:e390–
89. Fukuda,DH.Analysisoftherelativeageeffectineliteyouthjudo e398,2012.
athletes.IntJSportsPhysiolPerform10:1048–1051,2015. 108. Harries,SK,Lubans,DR,andCallister,R.Resistancetrainingto
90. Fullagar,HH,Skorski,S,Duffield,R,Hammes,D,Coutts,AJ,and improvepowerandsportsperformanceinadolescentathletes:A
Meyer,T.Sleepandathleticperformance:Theeffectsofsleeploss systematicreviewandmeta-analysis.JSciMedSport15:532–540,
onexerciseperformance,andphysiologicalandcognitive 2012.
responsestoexercise.SportsMed45:161–186,2015. 109. Hewett,TE,Ford,KR,andMyer,GD.Anteriorcruciateligament
91. Furley,PandMemmert,D.Coaches’implicitassociationsbetween injuriesinfemaleathletes:Part2,ameta-analysisofneuromuscular
sizeandgiftedness:Implicationsfortherelativeageeffect.JSports interventionsaimedatinjuryprevention.AmJSportsMed34:490–
Sci34:459–466,2016. 498,2006.
92. Gagne,́ F.Constructsandmodelspertainingtoexceptionalhuman 110. Hewett,TE,Lindenfeld,TN,Riccobene,JV,andNoyes,FR.The
abilities.In:InternationalHandbookofResearchandDevelopmentof effectofneuromusculartrainingontheincidenceofkneeinjuryin
GiftednessandTalent.K.A.Heller,F.J.Monks,andA.H.Passoweds. femaleathletes.Aprospectivestudy.AmJSportsMed27:699–706,
Oxford,UnitedKingdom:PergamonPress,1993. 1999.
93. Gil,SM,Badiola,A,Bidaurrazaga-Letona,I,Zabala-Lili,J, 111. Hewett,TE,Myer,GD,andFord,KR.Decreaseinneuromuscular
Gravina,L,Santos-Concejero,J,Lekue,JA,andGranados,C. controlaboutthekneewithmaturationinfemaleathletes.JBone
Relationshipbetweentherelativeageeffectandanthropometry, JointSurgAm86-A:1601–1608,2004.
maturityandperformanceinyoungsoccerplayers.JSportsSci32: 112. Hewett,TE,Myer,GD,Ford,KR,Heidt,RSJr,Colosimo,AJ,
479–486,2014. McLean,SG,vandenBogert,AJ,Paterno,MV,andSuccop,P.
94. Gokeler,A,Benjaminse,A,Hewett,TE,Paterno,MV,Ford,KR, Biomechanicalmeasuresofneuromuscularcontrolandvalgus
Otten,E,andMyer,GD.Feedbacktechniquestotargetfunctional loadingofthekneepredictanteriorcruciateligamentinjuryriskin
deficitsfollowinganteriorcruciateligamentreconstruction: femaleathletes:Aprospectivestudy.AmJSportsMed33:492–501,
Implicationsformotorcontrolandreductionofsecondinjuryrisk. 2005.
SportsMed43:1065–1074,2013. 113. Hewett,TE,Myer,GD,Kiefer,AW,andFord,KR.Longitudinal
increasesinkneeabductionmomentsinfemalesduringadolescent
95. Golley,RK,Maher,CA,Matricciani,L,andOlds,TS.Sleep
durationorbedtime?Exploringtheassociationbetweensleep
growth.MedSciSportsExerc47:2579–2585,2015.
timingbehaviour,dietandBMIinchildrenandadolescents.IntJ 114. Hills,AP,Andersen,LB,andByrne,NM.Physicalactivityand
Obes(Lond)37:546–551,2013. obesityinchildren.BrJSportsMed45:866–870,2011.
96. Goncalves,CE,Rama,LM,andFigueiredo,AB.Talent 115. Hills,AP,Okely,AD,andBaur,LA.Addressingchildhoodobesity
identificationandspecializationinsport:Anoverviewofsome throughincreasedphysicalactivity.NatRevEndocrinol6:543–549,
unansweredquestions.IntJSportsPhysiolPerform7:390–393,2012. 2010.
97. Graham,G,Holt/Hale,SA,andParker,M.ChildrenMoving:A 116. Hind,KandBurrows,M.Weight-bearingexerciseand
ReflectiveApproachtoTeachingPhysicalEducation.NewYork,NY: bonemineralaccrualinchildrenandadolescents:Areviewof
McGrawHill,2013. controlledtrials.Bone40:14–27,2007.
1504 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 15 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
117. Huppert,FA,Baylis,N,andKeverne,B.Introduction:Whydowe 135. Lai,SK,Costigan,SA,Morgan,PJ,Lubans,DR,Stodden,DF,
needascienceofwell-being?.PhilosTransRSocLondBBiolSci359: Salmon,J,andBarnett,LM.Doschool-basedinterventions
1331–1332,2004. focusingonphysicalactivity,fitness,orfundamentalmovement
skillcompetencyproduceasustainedimpactintheseoutcomesin
118. Jackowski,SA,Baxter-Jones,AD,Gruodyte-Raciene,R,
childrenandadolescents?Asystematicreviewoffollow-upstudies.
Kontulainen,SA,andErlandson,MC.Alongitudinalstudyofbone
area,content,density,andstrengthdevelopmentattheradiusand
SportsMed44:67–79,2014.
tibiainchildren4-12yearsofageexposedtorecreational 136. Leek,D,Carlson,JA,Cain,KL,Henrichon,S,Rosenberg,D,
gymnastics.OsteoporosInt26:1677–1690,2015. Patrick,K,andSallis,JF.Physicalactivityduringyouthsports
119. Jayanthi,N,Pinkham,C,Dugas,L,Patrick,B,andLabella,C.
practices.ArchPediatrAdolescMed165:294–299,2011.
Sportsspecializationinyoungathletes:Evidence-based 137. Leipold,BandGreve,W.Resilience:Aconceptualbridgebetween
recommendations.SportsHealth5:251–257,2013. copinganddevelopment.EurPsychol14:40–50,2009.
120. Jayanthi,NA,LaBella,CR,Fischer,D,Pasulka,J,andDugas,LR. 138. Lemos,AG,Avigo,EL,andBarela,JA.Physicaleducationin
Sports-specializedintensivetrainingandtheriskofinjuryinyoung kindergartenpromotesfundamentalmotorskilldevelopment.Adv
athletes:Aclinicalcase-controlstudy.AmJSportsMed43:794– PhysEduc2:17–21,2012.
801,2015.
139. Lexell,J,Sjostrom,M,Nordlund,AS,andTaylor,CC.Growthand
121. Johnson,BA,Salzberg,CL,andStevenson,DA.Asystematic developmentofhumanmuscle:Aquantitativemorphological
review:Plyometrictrainingprogramsforyoungchildren.JStrength studyofwholevastuslateralisfromchildhoodtoadultage.Muscle
CondRes25:2623–2633,2011. Nerve15:404–409,1992.
122. Jullien,H,Bisch,C,Largouet,N,Manouvrier,C,Carling,CJ,and 140. Lloyd,M,Saunders,TJ,Bremer,E,andTremblay,MS.Long-term
Amiard,V.Doesashortperiodoflowerlimbstrengthtraining importanceoffundamentalmotorskills:A20-yearfollow-up
improveperformanceinfield-basedtestsofrunningandagilityin study.AdaptPhysActivQ31:67–78,2014.
youngprofessionalsoccerplayers?.JStrengthCondRes22:404–
141. Lloyd,RS,Faigenbaum,AD,Stone,MH,Oliver,JL,Jeffreys,I,
411,2008.
Moody,JA,Brewer,C,Pierce,KC,McCambridge,TM,
123. Junge,A,Rosch,D,Peterson,L,Graf-Baumann,T,and Howard,R,Herrington,L,Hainline,B,Micheli,LJ,Jaques,R,
Dvorak,J.Preventionofsoccerinjuries:Aprospective Kraemer,WJ,McBride,MG,Best,TM,Chu,DA,Alvar,BA,and
interventionstudyinyouthamateurplayers.AmJSportsMed30: Myer,GD.Positionstatementonyouthresistancetraining:The
652–659,2002. 2014InternationalConsensus.BrJSportsMed48:498–505,
124. Karageorghis,CandTerry,P.InsideSportPsychology.Champaign, 2014.
IL:HumanKinetics,2011. 142. Lloyd,RSandOliver,JL.Theyouthphysicaldevelopmentmodel:
125. Keiner,M,Sander,A,Wirth,K,Caruso,O,Immesberger,P,and Anewapproachtolong-termathleticdevelopment.StrengthCond
Zawieja,M.Strengthperformanceinyouth:Trainabilityof J34:61–72,2012.
adolescentsandchildreninthebackandfrontsquats.JStrength 143. Lloyd,RS,Oliver,JL,Faigenbaum,AD,Howard,R,DeSte
CondRes27:357–362,2013. Croix,MB,Williams,CA,Best,TM,Alvar,BA,Micheli,LJ,
126. Keiner,M,Sander,A,Wirth,K,andSchmidtbleicher,D.Long- Thomas,DP,Hatfield,DL,Cronin,JB,andMyer,GD.Long-term
termstrengthtrainingeffectsonchange-of-directionsprint athleticdevelopment—Part1:Apathwayforallyouth.JStrength
performance.JStrengthCondRes28:223–231,2014. CondRes29:1439–1450,2015.
127. Kentta,G,Hassmen,P,andRaglin,JS.Trainingpracticesand 144. Lloyd,RS,Oliver,JL,Faigenbaum,AD,Howard,R,DeSte
overtrainingsyndromeinSwedishage-groupathletes.IntJSports Croix,MB,Williams,CA,Best,TM,Alvar,BA,Micheli,LJ,
Med22:460–465,2001. Thomas,DP,Hatfield,DL,Cronin,JB,andMyer,GD.Long-term
athleticdevelopment,part2:Barrierstosuccessandpotential
128. Kernozek,TW,Torry,MR,andIwasaki,M.Genderdifferencesin
solutions.JStrengthCondRes29:1451–1464,2015.
lowerextremitylandingmechanicscausedbyneuromuscular
fatigue.AmJSportsMed36:554–565,2008. 145. Lloyd,RS,Oliver,JL,Faigenbaum,AD,Myer,GD,andDeSte
Croix,MB.Chronologicalagevs.biologicalmaturation:
129. Kerr,G.Physicalandemotionalabuseofelitechildathletes:The
Implicationsforexerciseprogramminginyouth.JStrengthCond
caseofforcedphysicalexertion.In:EliteChildAthleteWelfare:
Res28:1454–1464,2014.
InternationalPerspectives.C.H.BrackenridgeandD.Rhind,eds.
London:BrunelUniversityPress,2010. 146. Lloyd,RS,Oliver,JL,Meyers,RW,Moody,JA,andStone,MH.
Long-termathleticdevelopmentanditsapplicationtoyouth
130. Kerssemakers,SP,Fotiadou,AN,deJonge,MC,
weightlifting.StrengthCondJ34:55–66,2012.
Karantanas,AH,andMaas,M.Sportinjuriesinthepaediatric
andadolescentpatient:Agrowingproblem.PediatrRadiol39: 147. Lloyd,RS,Radnor,JM,DeSteCroix,MBA,Cronin,JB,and
471–484,2009. Oliver,JL.Changesinsprintandjumpperformanceafter
traditional,plyometric,andcombinedresistancetraininginmale
131. Ko¨lling,S,Hitzschke,B,Holst,T,Ferrauti,A,Meyer,T,Pfeiffer,M,
youthpre-andpost-peakheightvelocity.JStrengthCondRes30:
andKellman,M.Validityoftheacuterecoveryandstressscale:
1239–1247,2016.
TrainingmonitoringoftheGermanjuniornationalfieldhockey
team.IntJSportsSciCoach10:529–542,2015. 148. Low,LKandCheng,HJ.Axonpruning:Anessentialstep
underlyingthedevelopmentalplasticityofneuronalconnections.
132. Krosshaug,T,Nakamae,A,Boden,BP,Engebretsen,L,Smith,G,
PhilosTransRSocLondBBiolSci361:1531–1544,2006.
Slauterbeck,JR,Hewett,TE,andBahr,R.Mechanismsofanterior
cruciateligamentinjuryinbasketball:Videoanalysisof39cases. 149. Lubans,DR,Morgan,PJ,Cliff,DP,Barnett,LM,andOkely,AD.
AmJSportsMed35:359–367,2007. Fundamentalmovementskillsinchildrenandadolescents:
Reviewofassociatedhealthbenefits.SportsMed40:1019–1035,
133. Kubo,K,Teshima,T,Ikebukuro,T,Hirose,N,andTsunoda,N.
2010.
Tendonpropertiesandmusclearchitectureforkneeextensorsand
plantarflexorsinboysandmen.ClinBiomech(bBristol,Avon)29: 150. Luke,A,Lazaro,RM,Bergeron,MF,Keyser,L,Benjamin,H,
506–511,2014. Brenner,J,d’Hemecourt,P,Grady,M,Philpott,J,andSmith,A.
Sports-relatedinjuriesinyouthathletes:Isoverschedulingarisk
134. Kushner,AM,Kiefer,AW,Lesnick,S,Faigenbaum,AD,Kashikar-
factor?.ClinJSportMed21:307–314,2011.
Zuck,S,andMyer,GD.TrainingthedevelopingbrainpartII:
Cognitiveconsiderationsforyouthinstructionandfeedback.Curr 151. Malina,RM.Earlysportspecialization:Roots,effectiveness,risks.
SportsMedRep14:235–243,2015. CurrSportsMedRep9:364–371,2010.
1505
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 16 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
152. Malina,RM.Physicalactivityasafactoringrowthandmaturation. speedinadolescentboysoversingleandmultiplesteps.Pediatr
In:HumanGrowthandDevelopment.N.CameronandB.Bogin,eds. ExercSci27:419–426,2015.
Waltham,MA:AcademicPress,2012.pp.375–396.
171. Meylan,CandMalatesta,D.Effectsofin-seasonplyometric
153. Malina,RM,Baxter-Jones,AD,Armstrong,N,Beunen,GP, trainingwithinsoccerpracticeonexplosiveactionsofyoung
Caine,D,Daly,RM,Lewis,RD,Rogol,AD,andRussell,K.Roleof players.JStrengthCondRes23:2605–2613,2009.
intensivetraininginthegrowthandmaturationofartistic
172. Micheli,LJandNatsis,KI.Preventinginjuriesinteamsports:What
gymnasts.SportsMed43:783–802,2013.
theteamphysicianneedstoknow.In:FIMSTeamPhysicianManual
154. Malina,RM,Coelho,ESMJ,Figueiredo,AJ,Carling,C,and (3rded.).L.J.Micheli,F.Pigozzi,K.M.Chan,W.R.Frontera,N.
Beunen,GP.Interrelationshipsamonginvasiveandnon-invasive Bachl,A.D.Smith,andS.T.Alenabi,eds.London:Routledge,2013.
indicatorsofbiologicalmaturationinadolescentmalesoccer pp.505–520.
players.JSportsSci30:1705–1717,2012.
173. Milliken,LA,Faigenbaum,AD,Loud,RL,andWestcott,WL.
155. Malina,RM,Eisenmann,JC,Cumming,SP,Ribeiro,B,and Correlatesofupperandlowerbodymuscularstrengthinchildren.
Aroso,J.Maturity-associatedvariationinthegrowthand JStrengthCondRes22:1339–1346,2008.
functionalcapacitiesofyouthfootball(soccer)players13-15years.
174. Moesch,K,Elbe,AM,Hauge,ML,andWikman,JM.Late
EurJApplPhysiol91:555–562,2004.
specialization:Thekeytosuccessincentimeters,grams,orseconds
156. Malina,RM,Rogol,AD,Cumming,SP,Coelho,ESMJ,and (cgs)sports.ScandJMedSciSports21:e282–e290,2011.
Figueiredo,AJ.Biologicalmaturationofyouthathletes:
175. Moliner-Urdiales,D,Ruiz,JR,Ortega,FB,Jimenez-Pavon,D,
Assessmentandimplications.BrJ SportsMed49:852–859,
Vicente-Rodriguez,G,Rey-Lopez,JP,Martinez-Gomez,D,
2015.
Casajus,JA,Mesana,MI,Marcos,A,Noriega-Borge,MJ,
157. MalinaRMB,CandBar-Or,O.Growth,MaturationandPhysical Sjostrom,M,Castillo,MJ,andMoreno,LA,AVENAand
Activity.Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2004. HELENAStudyGroups.Seculartrendsinhealth-relatedphysical
158. Mandelbaum,BR,Silvers,HJ,Watanabe,DS,Knarr,JF, fitnessinSpanishadolescents:TheAVENAandHELENAstudies.
Thomas,SD,Griffin,LY,Kirkendall,DT,andGarrett,WJr. JSciMedSport13:584–588,2010.
Effectivenessofaneuromuscularandproprioceptivetraining 176. Mostafavifar,AM,Best,TM,andMyer,GD.Earlysport
programinpreventinganteriorcruciateligamentinjuriesin specialisation,doesitleadtolong-termproblems?.BrJSportsMed
femaleathletes:2-yearfollow-up.AmJSportsMed33:1003– 47:1060–1061,2013.
1010,2005.
177. Mountjoy,M,Armstrong,N,Bizzini,L,Blimkie,C,Evans,J,
159. Mann,JB,Bryant,K,Johnstone,B,Ivey,P,andSayers,SP.Theeffect Gerrard,D,Hangen,J,Knoll,K,Micheli,L,Sangenis,P,andVan
ofphysicalandacademicstressonillnessandinjuryindivision1
Mechelen,W.IOCconsensusstatement:“Trainingtheelitechild
collegefootballplayers.JStrengthCondRes30:20–25,2016.
athlete”.BrJSportsMed42:163–164,2008.
160. Matina,RMandRogol,AD.Sporttrainingandthegrowthand
178. Mountjoy,M,Rhind,DJ,Tiivas,A,andLeglise,M.Safeguarding
pubertalmaturationofyoungathletes.PediatrEndocrinolRev9:
thechildathleteinsport:Areview,aframeworkand
441–455,2011.
recommendationsfortheIOCyouthathletedevelopmentmodel.
161. Matos,NandWinsley,RJ.Trainabilityofyoungathletesand BrJSportsMed49:883–886,2015.
overtraining.JSportsSciMed6:353–367,2007.
179. Must,AandTybor,DJ.Physicalactivityandsedentarybehavior:A
162. Matos,NF,Winsley,RJ,andWilliams,CA.Prevalenceof reviewoflongitudinalstudiesofweightandadiposityinyouth.Int
nonfunctionaloverreaching/overtraininginyoungEnglish JObes(Lond)29(Suppl.2):S84–S96,2005.
athletes.MedSciSportsExerc43:1287–1294,2011.
180. Myer,GD,Faigenbaum,AD,Chu,DA,Falkel,J,Ford,KR,
163. Matricciani,L,Olds,T,andPetkov,J.Insearchoflostsleep: Best,TM,andHewett,TE.Integrativetrainingforchildrenand
Seculartrendsinthesleeptimeofschool-agedchildrenand adolescents:Techniquesandpracticesforreducingsports-related
adolescents.SleepMedRev16:203–211,2012. injuriesandenhancingathleticperformance.PhysSportsmed39:
164. McCarthy,NandCollins,D.Initialidentification&selectionbias 74–84,2011.
versustheeventualconfirmationoftalent:Evidenceforthe 181. Myer,GD,Faigenbaum,AD,Edwards,NM,Clark,JF,Best,TM,
benefitsofarockyroad?.JSportsSci32:1604–1610,2014. andSallis,RE.Sixtyminutesofwhat?Adevelopingbrain
165. McHugh,MP.Oversizedyoungathletes:Aweightyconcern.BrJ perspectiveforactivatingchildrenwithanintegrativeexercise
SportsMed44:45–49,2010. approach.BrJSportsMed49:1510–1516,2015.
166. McLean,BD,Coutts,AJ,Kelly,V,McGuigan,MR,and 182. Myer,GD,Faigenbaum,AD,Ford,KR,Best,TM,Bergeron,MF,
Cormack,SJ.Neuromuscular,endocrine,andperceptualfatigue andHewett,TE.Whentoinitiateintegrativeneuromuscular
responsesduringdifferentlengthbetween-matchmicrocyclesin trainingtoreducesports-relatedinjuriesandenhancehealthin
professionalrugbyleagueplayers.IntJSportsPhysiolPerform5: youth?.CurrSportsMedRep10:155–166,2011.
367–383,2010. 183. Myer,GD,Faigenbaum,AD,Stracciolini,A,Hewett,TE,
167. McLean,SG,Fellin,RE,Suedekum,N,Calabrese,G,Passerallo,A, Micheli,LJ,andBest,TM.Exercisedeficitdisorderinyouth:A
andJoy,S.Impactoffatigueongender-basedhigh-risklanding paradigmshifttowarddiseasepreventionandcomprehensivecare.
strategies.MedSciSportsExerc39:502–514,2007. CurrSportsMedRep12:248–255,2013.
168. McNarry,MandJones,A.Theinfluenceoftrainingstatusonthe 184. Myer,GD,Ford,KR,Brent,JL,andHewett,TE.Theeffectsof
aerobicandanaerobicresponsestoexerciseinchildren:Areview. plyometricvs.dynamicstabilizationandbalancetrainingon
EurJSportSci14(Suppl.1):S57–S68,2014. power,balance,andlandingforceinfemaleathletes.JStrength
CondRes20:345–353,2006.
169. Meeusen,R,Duclos,M,Foster,C,Fry,A,Gleeson,M,Nieman,D,
Raglin,J,Rietjens,G,Steinacker,J,andUrhausen,A;European 185. Myer,GD,Ford,KR,Divine,JG,Wall,EJ,Kahanov,L,and
CollegeofSportScience;andAmericanCollegeofSports Hewett,TE.Longitudinalassessmentofnoncontactanterior
Medicine.Prevention,diagnosis,andtreatmentoftheovertraining cruciateligamentinjuryriskfactorsduringmaturationinafemale
syndrome:JointconsensusstatementoftheEuropeanCollegeof athlete:Acasereport.JAthlTrain44:101–109,2009.
SportScienceandtheAmericanCollegeofSportsMedicine.Med
186. Myer,GD,Jayanthi,N,DiFiori,JP,Faigenbaum,AD,
SciSportsExerc45:186–205,2013.
Kiefer,AW,Logerstedt,D,andMicheli,LJ.Alternative
170. Meyers,RW,Oliver,J,Lloyd,RS,Hughes,M,andCronin,J. solutionstoearlysportspecializationinyoungathletes.Sports
Reliabilityofthespatio-temporaldeterminantsofmaximalsprint Health8:65–73,2016.
1506 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 17 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
187. Myer,GD,Jayanthi,N,DiFiori,JP,Faigenbaum,AD,Kiefer,AW, Malina,RM.Therelationshipbetweenpeakheightvelocityand
Logerstedt,D,andMicheli,LJ.Sportspecialization,part1:Does physicalperformanceinyouthsoccerplayers.JSportsSci24:221–
earlysportsspecializationincreasenegativeoutcomesandreduce 230,2006.
theopportunityforsuccessinyoungathletes?.SportsHealth7:
206. Plisk,SSandStone,MH.Periodizationstrategies.StrengthCondJ
437–442,2015.
25:19–37,2003.
188. Myer,GD,Kushner,AM,Faigenbaum,AD,Kiefer,A,Kashikar-
207. Quatman,CE,Ford,KR,Myer,GD,andHewett,TE.Maturation
Zuck,S,andClark,JF.Trainingthedevelopingbrain,partI:
leadstogenderdifferencesinlandingforceandverticaljump
Cognitivedevelopmentalconsiderationsfortrainingyouth.Curr
performance:Alongitudinalstudy.AmJSportsMed34:806–813,
SportsMedRep12:304–310,2013.
2006.
189. Myer,GD,Lloyd,RS,Brent,JL,andFaigenbaum,AD.Howyoung
208. Quatman-Yates,CC,Myer,GD,Ford,KR,andHewett,TE.A
is“tooyoung”tostarttraining?.ACSMsHealthFitJ17:14–23,2013.
longitudinalevaluationofmaturationaleffectsonlowerextremity
190. Myer,GD,Sugimoto,D,Thomas,S,andHewett,TE.The strengthinfemaleadolescentathletes.PediatrPhysTher25:271–
influenceofageontheeffectivenessofneuromusculartrainingto 276,2013.
reduceanteriorcruciateligamentinjuryinfemaleathletes:Ameta-
209. Quatman-Yates,CC,Quatman,CE,Meszaros,AJ,
analysis.AmJSportsMed41:203–215,2013.
Paterno,MV,andHewett,TE.Asystematicreviewof
191. Nader,PR,Bradley,RH,Houts,RM,McRitchie,SL,and sensorimotorfunctionduringadolescence:Adevelopmental
O’Brien,M.Moderate-to-vigorousphysicalactivityfromages9to stageofincreasedmotorawkwardness?.BrJ SportsMed46:
15years.JAMA300:295–305,2008. 649–655,2012.
192. Nyland,J.Comingtotermswithearlysportsspecialization 210. Raglin,J,Sawamura,S,Alexiou,S,Hassmen,P,andKentta,G.
andathleticinjuries.JOrthopSportsPhysTher44:389–390, Trainingpracticesandstalenessin13-18-year-oldswimmers:A
2014. cross-culturalstudy.PediatrExercSci12:61–70,2000.
193. O’Brien,TD,Reeves,ND,Baltzopoulos,V,Jones,DA,and 211. Ratel,S,Duche,P,andWilliams,CA.Musclefatigueduring
Maganaris,CN.Muscle-tendonstructureanddimensionsinadults high-intensityexerciseinchildren.SportsMed36:1031–1065,
andchildren.JAnat216:631–642,2010. 2006.
194. Ogden,CL,Carroll,MD,Kit,BK,andFlegal,KM.Prevalenceof 212. Ratel,S,Williams,CA,Oliver,J,andArmstrong,N.Effectsofage
obesityandtrendsinbodymassindexamongUSchildrenand andrecoverydurationonperformanceduringmultipletreadmill
adolescents,1999-2010.JAMA307:483–490,2012. sprints.IntJSportsMed27:1–8,2006.
195. Okely,ADandBooth,ML.Masteryoffundamentalmovement 213. Reddy,LA,Fabiano,GA,Dudek,CM,andHsu,L.
skillsamongchildreninNewSouthWales:Prevalenceand Instructionalandbehaviormanagementpractices
sociodemographicdistribution.J SciMedSport7:358–372, implementedbyelementarygeneraleducationteachers.J Sch
2004. Psychol51:683–700,2013.
196. Oliver,JL,Brady,A,andLloyd,RS.Well-beingofyouthathletes. 214. Robinson,LE,Stodden,DF,Barnett,LM,Lopes,VP,Logan,SW,
In:StrengthandConditioningforYoungAthletes:Scienceand Rodrigues,LP,andD’Hondt,E.Motorcompetenceanditseffect
Application.R.S.LloydandJ.L.Oliver,eds.Oxon:Routledge,2013. onpositivedevelopmentaltrajectoriesofhealth.SportsMed45:
pp.213–225. 1273–1284,2015.
197. Oliver,JL,Lloyd,RS,andMeyers,RW.Trainingelitechild 215. Rogasch,NC,Dartnall,TJ,Cirillo,J,Nordstrom,MA,and
athletes:Promotingwelfareandwell-being.StrengthCondJ33: Semmler,JG.Corticomotorplasticityandlearningofaballistic
73–79,2011. thumbtrainingtaskarediminishedinolderadults.JApplPhysiol
(1985)107:1874–1883,2009.
198. Oliver,JLandSmith,PM.Neuralcontroloflegstiffnessduring
hoppinginboysandmen.JElectromyogrKinesiol20:973–979, 216. Rose,MS,Emery,CA,andMeeuwisse,WH.Sociodemographic
2010. predictorsofsportinjuryinadolescents.MedSciSportsExerc40:
444–450,2008.
199. Oliver,JL,Whitney,A,andLloyd,RS.Monitoringofin-season
neuromuscularandperceptualfatigueinyouthrugbyplayers.Eur 217. Rossler,R,Donath,L,Verhagen,E,Junge,A,Schweizer,T,and
JSportSci15:514–522,2015. Faude,O.Exercise-basedinjurypreventioninchildandadolescent
sport:Asystematicreviewandmeta-analysis.SportsMed44:1733–
200. Olsen,SJ2nd,Fleisig,GS,Dun,S,Loftice,J,andAndrews,JR.Risk
1748,2014.
factorsforshoulderandelbowinjuriesinadolescentbaseball
pitchers.AmJSportsMed34:905–912,2006. 218. Rumpf,MC,Cronin,JB,Oliver,JL,andHughes,M.Assessing
youthsprintability-methodologicalissues,reliabilityand
201. Ommundsen,Y,Roberts,GC,Lemyre,PN,andMiller,BW.
performancedata.PediatrExercSci23:442–467,2011.
Parentalandcoachsupportorpressureonpsychosocial
outcomesofpediatricathletesinsoccer.ClinJSportMed16: 219. Rumpf,MC,Cronin,JB,Pinder,SD,Oliver,J,andHughes,M.
522–526,2006. Effectofdifferenttrainingmethodsonrunningsprinttimesinmale
youth.PediatrExercSci24:170–186,2012.
202. Padua,DA,Arnold,BL,Perrin,DH,Gansneder,BM,Carcia,CR,
andGranata,KP.Fatigue,verticallegstiffness,andstiffness 220. Runhaar,J,Collard,DC,Singh,AS,Kemper,HC,van
controlstrategiesinmalesandfemales.JAthlTrain41:294–304, Mechelen,W,andChinapaw,M.MotorfitnessinDutchyouth:
2006. Differencesovera26-yearperiod(1980-2006).JSciMedSport13:
323–328,2010.
203. Painter,KB,Haff,GG,Ramsey,MW,McBride,J,Triplett,T,
Sands,WA,Lamont,HS,Stone,ME,andStone,MH.Strength 221. Ryan,RMandDeci,EL.Self-determinationtheoryandthe
gains:Blockversusdailyundulatingperiodizationweighttraining facilitationofintrinsicmotivation,socialdevelopment,andwell-
amongtrackandfieldathletes.IntJSportsPhysiolPerform7:161– being.AmPsychol55:68–78,2000.
169,2012.
222. Sallis,JF,Prochaska,JJ,andTaylor,WC.Areviewofcorrelatesof
204. Pearson,DT,Naughton,GA,andTorode,M.Predictabilityof physicalactivityofchildrenandadolescents.MedSciSportsExerc
physiologicaltestingandtheroleofmaturationintalent 32:963–975,2000.
identificationforadolescentteamsports.JSciMedSport9:277–
223. Salvy,SJ,delaHaye,K,Bowker,JC,andHermans,RC.
287,2006.
Influenceofpeersandfriendsonchildren’sandadolescents’
205. Philippaerts,RM,Vaeyens,R,Janssens,M,VanRenterghem,B, eatingandactivitybehaviors.PhysiolBehav106:369–378,
Matthys,D,Craen,R,Bourgois,J,Vrijens,J,Beunen,G,and 2012.
1507
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |

--- Page 18 ---
NSCA Position Statement on LTAD
224. Sander,A,Keiner,M,Wirth,K,andSchmidtbleicher,D. health-relatedfitnessinyouth.PediatrExercSci26:231–241,
Influenceofa2-yearstrengthtrainingprogrammeonpower 2014.
performanceineliteyouthsoccerplayers.EurJ SportSci13:
243. Stovitz,SDandJohnson,RJ.“Underuse”asacausefor
445–451,2013.
musculoskeletalinjuries:Isittimethatwestartedreframingour
225. Sandercock,GR,Ogunleye,AA,Parry,DA,Cohen,DD, message?.BrJSportsMed40:738–739,2006.
Taylor,MJ,andVoss,C.Athleticperformanceandbirthmonth:Is
244. Stratton,GandWilliams,CA.Childrenandfitnesstesting.In:Sport
therelativeageeffectmorethanjustselectionbias?.IntJSports
andExercisePhysiologyTestingGuidelines.E.M.Winter,A.M.Jones,
Med35:1017–1023,2014.
R.C.R.Davison,P.D.Bromley,andT.H.Mercer,eds.Oxon:
226. Sandercock,GR,Taylor,MJ,Voss,C,Ogunleye,AA,Cohen,DD, Routledge,2006.pp.211–223.
andParry,DA.Quantificationoftherelativeageeffectinthree
245. Sugimoto,D,Myer,GD,Foss,KD,andHewett,TE.Dosageeffects
indicesofphysicalperformance.JStrengthCondRes27:3293–
ofneuromusculartraininginterventiontoreduceanteriorcruciate
3299,2013.
ligamentinjuriesinfemaleathletes:Meta-andsub-groupanalyses.
227. Saracci,R.TheWorldHealthOrganisationneedstoreconsiderits SportsMed44:551–562,2014.
definitionofhealth.BMJ314:1409–1410,1997.
246. Swart,E,Redler,L,Fabricant,PD,Mandelbaum,BR,
228. Schmikli,SL,deVries,WR,Inklaar,H,andBackx,FJ.Injury Ahmad,CS,andWang,YC.Preventionandscreening
preventiontargetgroupsinsoccer:Injurycharacteristicsand programsforanteriorcruciateligamentinjuriesinyoung
incidenceratesinmalejuniorandseniorplayers.JSciMedSport athletes:Acost-effectivenessanalysis.JBoneJointSurgAm96:
14:199–203,2011. 705–711,2014.
229. Schranz,N,Tomkinson,G,andOlds,T.Whatistheeffectof 247. TenHoor,GA,Plasqui,G,Ruiter,RA,Kremers,SP,Rutten,GM,
resistancetrainingonthestrength,bodycompositionand Schols,AM,andKok,G.Anewdirectioninpsychologyand
psychosocialstatusofoverweightandobesechildrenand health:Resistanceexercisetrainingforobesechildrenand
adolescents?ASystematicreviewandmeta-analysis.SportsMed43: adolescents.PsycholHealth31:1–8,2016.
893–907,2013.
248. Tenforde,AS,Sayres,LC,McCurdy,ML,Collado,H,Sainani,KL,
230. Schranz,N,Tomkinson,G,Parletta,N,Petkov,J,andOlds,T. andFredericson,M.Overuseinjuriesinhighschoolrunners:
Canresistancetrainingchangethestrength,bodycomposition Lifetimeprevalenceandpreventionstrategies.PMR3:125–131,
andself-conceptofoverweightandobeseadolescentmales?A 2011;quiz131.
randomisedcontrolledtrial.BrJ SportsMed48:1482–1488,
2014. 249. Terry,PC,Lane,AM,Lane,HJ,andKeohane,L.Developmentand
validationofamoodmeasureforadolescents.JSportsSci17:861–
231. Shaibi,GQ,Cruz,ML,Ball,GD,Weigensberg,MJ,Salem,GJ,
872,1999.
Crespo,NC,andGoran,MI.Effectsofresistancetrainingon
insulinsensitivityinoverweightLatinoadolescentmales.MedSci 250. Tibana,RA,Prestes,J,NascimentoDda,C,Martins,OV,De
SportsExerc38:1208–1215,2006. Santana,FS,andBalsamo,S.Highermuscleperformancein
adolescentscomparedwithadultsafteraresistancetrainingsession
232. Smith,RE,Smoll,FL,andCumming,SP.Effectsof
withdifferentrestintervals.JStrengthCondRes26:1027–1032,2012.
amotivationalclimateinnterventionforcoachesonyoung
athletes’sportperformanceanxiety.J SportExercPsychol29: 251. Tofler,IR,Knapp,PK,andLarden,M.Achievementbyproxy
39–59,2007. distortioninsports:Adistortedmentoringofhigh-achieving
youth.Historicalperspectivesandclinicalinterventionwith
233. Smith,RE,Smoll,FL,andCumming,SP.Motivationalclimateand
children,adolescents,andtheirfamilies.ClinSportsMed24:805–
changesinyoungathletes’achievementgoalorientations.Motiv
828,2005;viii.
Emot33:173–183,2009.
252. Tremblay,MS,Gray,CE,Akinroye,K,Harrington,DM,
234. Smoll,FL,Cumming,SP,andSmith,RE.Enhancingcoach-parent
Katzmarzyk,PT,Lambert,EV,Liukkonen,J,Maddison,R,
relationshipsinyouthsports:Increasingharmonyandminimizing
Ocansey,RT,Onywera,VO,Prista,A,Reilly,JJ,Rodriguez
hassle.IntJSportsSciCoach6:13–26,2011.
Martinez,MP,SarmientoDuenas,OL,Standage,M,and
235. Smucny,M,Parikh,SN,andPandya,NK.Consequencesofsingle Tomkinson,G.Physicalactivityofchildren:Aglobalmatrixof
sportspecializationinthepediatricandadolescentathlete.Orthop gradescomparing15countries.JPhysActHealth11(Suppl.1):
ClinNorthAm46:249–258,2015. S113–S125,2014.
236. Soligard,T,Myklebust,G,Steffen,K,Holme,I,Silvers,H, 253. Tremblay,MSandWillms,JD.IstheCanadianchildhoodobesity
Bizzini,M,Junge,A,Dvorak,J,Bahr,R,andAndersen,TE. epidemicrelatedtophysicalinactivity?.IntJObesRelatMetab
Comprehensivewarm-upprogrammetopreventinjuriesinyoung Disord27:1100–1105,2003.
femalefootballers:Clusterrandomisedcontrolledtrial.BMJ337:
254. Tudor-Locke,C,Johnson,WD,andKatzmarzyk,PT.
a2469,2008.
Accelerometer-determinedstepsperdayinUSchildrenandyouth.
237. Sowell,ER,Thompson,PM,Leonard,CM,Welcome,SE, MedSciSportsExerc42:2244–2250,2010.
Kan,E,andToga,AW.Longitudinalmappingofcortical
255. Vaeyens,R,Lenoir,M,Williams,AM,andPhilippaerts,RM.Talent
thicknessandbraingrowthinnormalchildren.J Neurosci24:
identificationanddevelopmentprogrammesinsport:Current
8223–8231,2004.
modelsandfuturedirections.SportsMed38:703–714,2008.
238. Sowell,ER,Trauner,DA,Gamst,A,andJernigan,TL.
256. ValovichMcLeod,TC,Decoster,LC,Loud,KJ,Micheli,LJ,
Developmentofcorticalandsubcorticalbrainstructuresin
Parker,JT,Sandrey,MA,andWhite,C.Nationalathletictrainers’
childhoodandadolescence:AstructuralMRIstudy.DevMed
ChildNeurol44:4–16,2002. associationpositionstatement:Preventionofpediatricoveruse
injuries.JAthlTrain46:206–220,2011.
239. Stein,CJandMicheli,LJ.Overuseinjuriesinyouthsports.Phys
Sportsmed38:102–108,2010. 257. vanBeurden,E,Zask,A,Barnett,LM,andDietrich,UC.
Fundamentalmovementskills–howdoprimaryschoolchildren
240. Steptoe,AandButler,N.Sportsparticipationandemotional perform?the’MoveitGrooveit’programinruralAustralia.JSci
wellbeinginadolescents.Lancet347:1789–1792,1996.
MedSport5:244–252,2002.
241. Stiles,JandJernigan,TL.Thebasicsofbraindevelopment.
258. vanderSluis,A,Elferink-Gemser,MT,Coelho-e-Silva,MJ,
NeuropsycholRev20:327–348,2010.
Nijboer,JA,Brink,MS,andVisscher,C.Sportinjuriesalignedto
242. Stodden,DF,Gao,Z,Goodway,JD,andLangendorfer,SJ. peakheightvelocityintalentedpubertalsoccerplayers.IntJSports
Dynamicrelationshipsbetweenmotorskillcompetenceand Med35:351–355,2014.
1508 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 19 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca.com
259. VanPraagh,EandDore,E.Short-termmusclepowerduring 264. WHO.GlobalRecommendationsonPhysicalActivityforHealth.
growthandmaturation.SportsMed32:701–728,2002. Geneva:WorldHealthOrganisation,2010.
260. Vealey,RNandChase,MA.Self-confidenceinsport.In:Advances 265. Wiersma,LD.Risksandbenefitsofyouthsportspecialization:
inSportPsychology(3rded.).T.S.Horn,ed.Champaign,IL:Human Perspectivesandrecommendations.PediatrExercSci12:13–22,
Kinetics,2008. 2000.
261. Viru,A,Loko,J,Harro,M,Volver,A,Laaneot,L,andViru,M. 266. Winter,EMandCobb,M.Ethicsinpaediatricresearch.In:
Criticalperiodsinthedevelopmentofperformancecapacityduring PaediatricExerciseScienceandMedicine(2nded.).N.Armstrongand
childhoodandadolescence.EurJPhysEducation4:75–119,1999. W.VanMechelen,eds.Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress,2008.pp.
3–12.
262. Waugh,CM,Korff,T,Fath,F,andBlazevich,AJ.Rapid
forceproductioninchildrenandadults:Mechanicalandneural 267. Witzke,KAandSnow,CM.Effectsofplyometricjumptrainingon
contributions.MedSciSportsExerc45:762–771,2013. bonemassinadolescentgirls.MedSciSportsExerc32:1051–1057,
2000.
263. Welsman,JRandArmstrong,N.Themeasurementand
interpretationofaerobicfitnessinchildren:Currentissues.JRSoc 268. Wojtys,EM.Sportsspecializationvsdiversification.SportsHealth5:
Med89:281P–285P,1996. 212–213,2013.
1509
VOLUME30 | NUMBER6| JUNE2016 |
