
--- Page 1 ---
POSITION STATEMENT
Y R T : U P
OUTH ESISTANCE RAINING PDATED OSITION
S P F N S
TATEMENT APER ROM THE ATIONAL TRENGTH
C A
AND ONDITIONING SSOCIATION
AVERY D. FAIGENBAUM,1 WILLIAM J. KRAEMER,2 CAMERON J. R. BLIMKIE,3 IAN JEFFREYS,4
LYLE J. MICHELI,5 MIKE NITKA,6 AND THOMAS W. ROWLAND 7
1DepartmentofHealthandExerciseScience,TheCollegeofNewJersey,Ewing,NewJersey08628;2DepartmentofKinesiology,
UniversityofConnecticut,Storrs,Connecticut;3DepartmentofKinesiology,McMasterUniversity,Hamilton,Ontario,Canada;
4DepartmentofScienceandSport,UniversityofGlamorgan,Pontypridd,Wales,UnitedKingdom;5DivisionofSportsMedicine,
Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 6Health and Physical Education Department, Muskego High School, Muskego,
Wisconsin; and 7Department of Pediatrics, Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, Massachusetts
ABSTRACT schools,healthclubs,andsporttrainingcenters,itisimperative
Faigenbaum,AD,Kraemer,WJ,Blimkie,CJR,Jeffreys,I,Micheli, todetermine safe,effective, andenjoyablepractices bywhich
LJ, Nitka, M, and Rowland, TW. Youth resistance training: resistance training can improve the health, fitness, and sports
Updated position statement paper from the National Strength performance ofyounger populations.
and Conditioning Association. J Strength Cond Res 23(5): The National Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA)
S60–S79, 2009—Current recommendations suggest that recognizesandsupportsthepremisethatmanyofthebenefits
school-aged youth should participate daily in 60 minutes or associated with adult resistance training programs are attain-
moreofmoderatetovigorousphysicalactivitythatisdevelop- able by children and adolescents who follow age-specific
mentally appropriate and enjoyable and involves a variety of resistance training guidelines. The NSCA published the first
activities(219).Notonlyisregularphysicalactivityessentialfor positionstatementpaperonyouthresistancetrainingin1985
normal growth and development, but also a physically active (170)andrevisedthisstatementin1996(72).Thepurposeof
lifestyle duringthepediatricyearsmayhelptoreducetherisk the present report is to update and clarify the 1996 recom-
of developing some chronic diseases later in life (196). In mendations on 4 major areas of importance. These topics
additiontoaerobicactivitiessuchasswimmingandbicycling, include (a) the potential risks and concerns associated with
researchincreasinglyindicatesthatresistancetrainingcanoffer youth resistance training, (b) the potential health and fitness
unique benefits for children and adolescents when appropri- benefitsofyouthresistancetraining,(c)thetypesandamount
ately prescribed and supervised (28,66,111,139,147,234). of resistance training needed by healthy children and adoles-
Thequalifiedacceptanceofyouthresistancetrainingbymedi- cents, and (d) program design considerations for optimizing
cal, fitness, and sport organizations is becoming universal long-term training adaptations. The NSCA basedthis position
(5,6,8,12,18,33,104,167,192,215). statementpaperonacomprehensive analysisofthepertinent
Nowadays,comprehensiveschool-basedprogramsarespecif-
scientificevidenceregardingtheanatomical,physiological,and
ically designed to enhance health-related components of phy-
psychosocial effects of youth resistance training. An expert
sicalfitness,whichincludemuscularstrength(169).Inaddition,
panel of exercise scientists, physicians, and health/physical
thehealthclubandsportconditioningindustryisgettingmore
educationteacherswithclinical,practical,andresearchexper-
involved intheyouthfitnessmarket.IntheU.S.A.,thenumber
tise regarding issues related to pediatric exercise science,
of health club members between the ages of 6 and 17 years
sports medicine, and resistance training contributed to this
continues to increase (127,252) and a growing number of
statement. The NSCA Research Committee reviewed this
privatesportconditioningcentersnowcatertoyoungathletes.
reportbefore theformalendorsement bytheNSCA.
Thus, as more children and adolescents resistance train in
Forthepurposeofthisarticle,thetermchildrenreferstoboys
andgirlswhohavenotyetdevelopedsecondarysexcharacter-
AddresscorrespondencetoAveryFaigenbaum,faigenba@tcnj.edu. istics(approximatelyuptotheageof11yearsingirlsand13
yearsinboys;Tannerstages1and2ofsexualmaturation).This
23(Supplement5)/S60–S79
period of development is referred to as preadolescence. The
JournalofStrengthandConditioningResearch
(cid:1)2009NationalStrengthandConditioningAssociation term adolescence refers to a period between childhood and
S60 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 2 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
adulthoodandincludesgirlsaged12–18yearsandboysaged departments to make nationwide projections of the total
14–18years(Tannerstages3and4ofsexualmaturation).The number of injuries related to exercises and equipment
terms youth and young athletes are broadly defined in this (231,232). However, NEISS data are based on injuries that
report toinclude both children andadolescents. patients state are related to resistance exercise and
equipment, and therefore, it is incorrect to conclude that
Bydefinition,thetermresistancetrainingreferstoaspecialized
theinjurieswerecausedbysuchactivitiesanddevices.Infact,
methodofconditioning,whichinvolvestheprogressiveuseof
many of the reported injuries were actually caused by
a wide range of resistive loads and a variety of training
inappropriate training techniques, excessive loading, poorly
modalities designed to enhance health, fitness, and sports
designed equipment,ready accesstotheequipment,orlack
performance. Although the term resistance training, strength
of qualified adult supervision. Although these findings
training,andweighttrainingaresometimesusedsynonymously,
indicatethattheunsupervisedandimproperuseofresistance
the term resistance training encompasses a broader range of training equipment may be injurious, it is misleading to
training modalities and a wider variety of training goals. The generalizethesefindingstoproperlydesignedandsupervised
termweightliftingreferstoacompetitivesportthatinvolvesthe youth resistance training programs.
performance of thesnatch andclean andjerk lifts. Current findings from prospective resistance training
This article builds on previous recommendations from the studiesindicatealowriskofinjuryinchildrenandadolescents
NSCAandshouldserveastheprevailingstatementregarding who follow age-appropriate training guidelines. In the vast
majority of published reports, no overt clinical injuries have
youthresistancetraining.ItisthecurrentpositionoftheNSCA
been reported during resistance training. Although various
that:
resistance training modalities and a variety of training regi-
1. A properly designed and supervised resistance training
menshavebeen used,allthetrainingprogramsweresuper-
programisrelativelysafeforyouth.
visedandappropriatelyprescribedtoensurethatthetraining
2. A properly designed and supervised resistance training
programwasmatchedtotheinitialcapacityoftheparticipant.
programcanenhancethemuscularstrengthandpowerof
Only 3 published studies have reported resistance training–
youth.
related injuries in children (a shoulder strain that resolved
3. A properly designed and supervised resistance training
within1weekofrest(187),ashoulderstrainthatresultedin
program can improve the cardiovascular risk profile of
1 missed training session (144), and a nonspecific anterior
youth.
thigh pain that resolved with 5 minutes of rest (198)). In a
4. A properly designed and supervised resistance training
report(187),therewasnoevidenceofeithermusculoskeletal
program can improve motor skill performance and may
injury (measured by biphasic scintigraphy) or muscle
contributetoenhancedsportsperformanceofyouth.
necrosis (determined by serum creatine phosphokinase
5. A properly designed and supervised resistance training
levels) after 14 weeks of progressive resistance training.
programcanincreaseayoungathlete’sresistancetosports-
Youth resistance training, as with most physical activ-
relatedinjuries.
ities, does carry with it some degree of inherent risk of
6. A properly designed and supervised resistance training
musculoskeletal injury, yet this risk is no greater than many
program can help improve the psychosocial well-being
othersportsandrecreationalactivitiesinwhichchildrenand
ofyouth.
adolescentsregularlyparticipate.Inaprospectivestudythat
7. A properly designed and supervised resistance training
evaluated the incidence of sports-related injuries in school-
program can help promote and develop exercise habits
aged youth over a 1-year period (258), resistance training
duringchildhoodandadolescence.
resultedin0.7%of1576injurieswhereasfootball,basketball,
KEY WORDS strength training, weight training, weightlifting, and soccer resulted in approximately 19, 15, and 2%,
children,adolescents respectively, of all injuries. When the data were evaluated
in terms of injury to participant ratio in school team sports,
football(28%),wrestling(16.4%),andgymnastics(13%)were
LITERATURE REVIEW
at the top of the list. In general, injuries related to resis-
RisksandConcernsRelatedtoYouthResistanceTraining tance training in high school athletes appear to involve the
D
uringthe1970sand1980s,oneofthereasonsthat aggressiveprogressionoftrainingloadsorimproperexercise
resistance training was not often recommended technique (31,35,108,197).
for children and adolescents was the presumed Findingsfromthe2005–2006HighSchoolSports-Related
high risk of injury associated with this type of InjurySurveillanceStudyrevealedthatparticipationinteam
exercise.Inpart,thewidespreadfearofinjuryassociatedwith sportsresultedinanestimated1.4millioninjuriesatarateof
youthresistancetrainingduringthiserastemmedfromdata 2.4 injuries per 1,000 athlete exposures (i.e., practices and
gathered by the National Electronic Injury Surveillance competition) (45). Of the 9 sports studied, football had the
System (NEISS) of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety highestinjuryrate(4.36injuriesper1,000athleteexposures),
Commission.NEISSusesdatafromvariousemergencyroom whereasboys’baseball(1.19)andgirls’softball(1.13)hadthe
S61
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 3 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
lowestinjuryrates(45).Althoughdatacomparingtherelative shouldbeaprerequisiteforlower-bodyplyometrictrainingis
safety of resistance training, weightlifting, and other sports notsupportedbycurrentresearchandclinicalobservations.
are limited, in a retrospective evaluation of injury rates in Indeed, comprehensive resistance training programs that
adolescents it was revealed that resistance training and include plyometric exercises have been found to enhance
weightlifting were markedly safer than many other sports movement biomechanics, improve functional abilities, and
and activities (114). In the aforementioned report (114), the decrease the number of sports-related injuries in young
overall injury rate per 100 participant hours was 0.8000 for athletes (115,120,143,149,168).
rugby and 0.0120 and 0.0013 for resistance training and Research studies indicate that plyometric training
weightlifting,respectively.Thislaterfindingmaybeexplained, can be a safe and worthwhile method of conditioning
at least in part, by the fact that the sport of weightlifting is for youth if appropriately prescribed and implemented
typically characterized by well-informed coaches and a (56,69,75,125,134,143,150,151,202). Although plyometric
gradual progression of training loads, which are required to exercises typically include hops and jumps that exploit the
effectively learn the technique of advanced multi-joint lifts. muscles’ cycle of lengthening and shortening to increase
Withqualified instructionandastepwiseprogressionofthe muscle power, watching children on a playground supports
trainingprogram,researchershavereportedsignificantgains the premise that the movement pattern of boys and girls as
in muscular strength without any report of injury when they skip and jump can be considered plyometric. For
weightlifting movements (snatch; clean and jerk; and example, when a child plays hopscotch and jumps from
modified cleans, pulls, and presses) were incorporated into square to square, the quadriceps stretch eccentrically when
a youth resistance training program (74,105,198,204). the child lands and then they shorten concentrically when
Insupportoftheseobservations,othershaveevaluatedthe thechildjumps.Thistypeofexercise,althoughgamelikein
incidenceofinjuryinyoungweightliftersandconcludedthat nature, actually conditions the body to increase speed of
competitive weightlifting can be a relatively safe sport for movementandimprovepowerproduction(47).Nonetheless,
children and adolescents provided that age-appropriate there is the potential for injury or illness to occur if the
training guidelines are followed and qualified coaching is intensity,volume,orfrequencyofplyometrictrainingexceed
available(38,182).Becauseweightlifting movementsinvolve theabilitiesoftheparticipants.Inacasereport,a12-year-old
more complex neural activation patterns than other resis- boy developed exertional rhabdomyolysis after he was in-
tanceexercises,childhoodmaybetheidealtimetodevelop structed toperformexcessive (.250) repetitivesquat jumps
the coordination and skill technique to perform these lifts in a physical education class (48).
correctly (57). To date, no scientific evidence indicates that A traditional area of concern related to youth resistance
properly performed and sensibly progressed weightlifting training is the potential for training-induced damage to the
movements performed during practice or competition are growthcartilage,whichisfoundat3mainsitesinagrowing
riskier than other sports and activities in which youth child’s body: the growth plates near the ends of the long
regularly participate. Nevertheless, due to the potential for bones, the cartilage lining the joint surfaces (articular
injury during the performance of multi-joint free weight cartilage),andthepointsatwhichthemajortendonsattach
exercises (190), youth coaches should be aware of the to the bones (apophysis) (161). Because growth cartilage is
considerableamountoftimeittakestoteachtheseliftsand ‘‘pre-bone,’’itisweakerthanadjacentconnectivetissueand
should be knowledgeable of the progression from basic therefore more easily damaged by repetitive microtrauma
exercises (e.g., front squat) to skill transfer exercises (e.g., (161).In somecases,damage tothisarea ofthe bone could
overhead squat) and finally to the competitive lifts (snatch result in time lost from training, significant discomfort, and
and clean and jerk). growth disturbances (41). A few retrospective case reports
Another concern related to youth resistance training publishedinthe1970sand1980snotedinjurytothegrowth
regardsthesafetyandsuitabilityofplyometrictraining(also cartilage during preadolescence (108) and adolescence
called stretch-shortening cycle exercise) for children and (25,31,108,128,194,197). However, most of these injuries
adolescents. Unlike traditional strength-building exercises, wereduetoimproperliftingtechniques,maximallifts,orlack
plyometric training conditions the body through dynamic of qualified adult supervision.
movements, which involve a rapid eccentric muscle action Althoughchildrenandadolescentsaresusceptibletoinjury
that is immediately followed by a rapid concentric muscle to the growth cartilage, the potential for this type of injury
action (47,97). When the stretching and shortening of may be less in a preadolescent child than in an adolescent
a muscle are performed quickly, the force generated during because the growth cartilage may actually be stronger and
the muscle action is greater than the force that would be more resistant to sheering type forces in younger children
generated if the muscle were not stretched immediately (160). To date, injury to the growth cartilage has not been
before the muscle action (97). The contention that age- reported in any prospective youth resistance training
appropriate plyometric training is unsafe for youth or that researchstudy.Furthermore,thereisnoevidencetosuggest
a predetermined baseline level of strength (e.g., 1 repetition that resistance training will negatively impact growth and
maximum [1RM] squat should be 1.5 times body weight) maturation during childhood and adolescence (91,147).
S62 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 4 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
The potential for repetitive-use soft-tissue injuries is and muscle strength during the developmental years (195).
another concern related to youth resistance training. This Although different children do not follow the same rates of
type of injury often does not always cause children or change,performancevariablessuchasgripstrengthnormally
adolescents to go to the emergency room or even to see increase from childhood through the early teenage years
aphysician,sotheincidenceoftheseinjuriesismoredifficult (148). Consequently, strength changes from low-volume
todetermine.Nevertheless,lowerbackpainamongyouthhas (sets3repetitions3load),short-durationresistancetraining
becomeasignificantpublichealthissuewithprevalencerates programs may not be distinguishable from gains due to
inadolescentsapproachingthoseinadults(9,131).Inseveral normal growth and development (59,117). To differentiate
reports,lowerbackpainwasthemostfrequentinjuryinhigh training adaptations from those of normal growth and
school athletes who participated in resistance training development,itisapparentthatanadequatetrainingstimulus
programs (31,35,190). In a study that involved adolescent and a prolonged training period are required.
powerlifterswhopresumablytrainedwithmaximalornear- A compelling body of scientific evidence indicates that
maximal resistances, it was revealed that 50% of reported children and adolescents can significantly increase their
injuriesweretothelowerback(35).Althoughmanyfactors strength—above and beyond growth and maturation—
need to be considered when evaluating these data (e.g., providingthattheresistancetrainingprogramisofsufficient
exercise technique and progression of training loads), the intensity, volume, and duration (30,55,70,74,77,79,80,86–88,
importanceofgeneralphysicalfitnessandlowerbackhealth 92,144,180,183,186,199,205,210,221,227,238,246,248,250).
should not be overlooked. Because insufficient strength, In addition, 2 meta-analyses on youth resistance training
muscular endurance, and stability in the lower back have indicatedmeaneffectsizesof0.57and0.75(94,179).Collec-
been associated with current and future lower back pain in tively, these findings along with clinical observations and
adolescents (9,211), there is a role for preventive interven- evidence-basedreviews(28,66,111,139,147,200,234)indicate
tions that include resistance exercise to possibly reduce the thatwell-designedresistancetrainingprogramscanenhance
prevalence or severity of lower back pain in youth. the muscular strength of children and adolescents beyond
Ofnote,thereisanincreasedriskofinjurytochildrenand that which is normally due to growth and development.
adolescentswhouseexerciseequipment athome(107,132). Children as young as 5 and 6 years have benefited from
Ithasbeenreportedthatyoungchildrenaremorelikelytobe regularparticipationinaresistancetrainingprogram(11,86,
injuredfromhomeexerciseequipmentthanolderagegroups 246),althoughmostsamplestypicallyspannedseveralyears
due,inpart,tounsafebehavior,equipmentmalfunction,and (e.g.,7to12yearsofage).Whileamajorityoftrainingstudies
lack of supervision (132). There is also the potential for had a duration of 8–20 weeks (79,80,92,118,144,186,205,
a catastrophic injury if safety standards for youth resistance 210,246),studieslasting2–3schoolyearshavebeenreported
trainingarenotfollowed.Inacasestudyreport,a9-year-old (93,198).Awidevarietyofresistancetrainingprogramsfrom
boy died when a barbell rolled off a bench press support singlesetsessionsonweightmachines (249)toprogressive,
and fell on his chest (102). These findings underscore the multi-set training protocols on different types of equipment
importance of providing close supervision and safe training (22,74,105,186,198,238) have proven to be efficacious.
equipment for all youth resistance training programs. Training modalities have included weight machines (both
Anyexerciseoractivityrecommendationforchildrenand adult(55,180,238,239)andchildsize(79,80,86,183,249)),free
adolescents has risks as well as benefits. The risk of injury weights(22,55,74,94,105,198,199),hydraulicmachines(30,246),
whileresistancetrainingorweightliftingcanbeminimizedby pneumatic machines (205), medicine balls (77,221); elastic
qualified supervision, appropriate program design, sensible bands (11), isometric contractions (101,117,174), and body
progression, and careful selection of training equipment. weight exercises (17,92,210,236). As previously observed in
Inaddition,theriskofinjurycanbeminimizedbylimitingthe adult populations, training adaptations that occur in youth
numberofheavyliftsduringaworkout,allowingforadequate are specific to the muscle action or muscle groups that are
recovery between training sessions, and listening to each trained(97,174).
child’s questions and concerns. In general, the risk of injury Strength gains up to 74% (88) have been reported after
associated with resistance training is similar for youth and 8weeksofprogressiveresistancetraining,althoughgainsof
adults. There are no justifiable safety reasons that preclude roughly 30% are typically observed after short-term (8–20
childrenoradolescentsfromparticipatinginsucharesistance weeks)youthresistancetrainingprograms.Reportedrelative
trainingprogram. (%changeaboveinitiallevels)strengthgainsachievedduring
preadolescence are equal to if not greater than the relative
EffectivenessofYouthResistanceTraining gains observed during adolescence (144,174,180,248). Adult
During childhood and adolescence, physiologic factors athletestendtobestrongerthanadolescentathletes(14),and
related to growth and development are in a constant state thereisnoclearevidenceofanymajordifferenceinstrength
of evolution. Due to the progression of growth, it can be betweenpreadolescentboysandgirls(27,81,200).Intermsof
expectedthathealthychildrenwillshownoticeablegainsin absolute strength gains, it appears that adolescents make
height, weight, maximal oxygen uptake, anaerobic capacity, greater gains than children (144,200,239) and adults make
S63
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 5 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
greater gains than young adolescents (199), although some causestructuraldamageinchildren.Thus,themaximalforce
findings are at variance with this suggestion (248). production capabilities of children have not been directly
evaluatedinsomestudies.Yetnoinjurieshavebeenreported
PersistenceofTraining-InducedStrengthGains
inprospectivestudiesthatutilizedadequatewarm-upperiods,
The evaluation of strength changes in youth after the tem-
appropriate progression of loads, close and qualified super-
porary or permanent reduction or withdrawal of a training
vision, and critically chosen maximal strength tests (1RM
stimulus(referredtoasdetraining)iscomplicatedbythecon-
performance lifts, maximal isometric tests, and maximal
comitant growth-related strength increasesduring the same
isokinetic tests) to evaluate resistance training–induced
period.Althoughrelativeinformationregardingtheeffectsof
changes in children. In a study, 96 children performed a
detraining on younger populations is not extensive, the
1RM strength test on 1 upper-body and 1 lower-body
availabledatasuggestthattraining-inducedgainsinstrength
weight machine exercise (81). No abnormal responses or
andpowerinchildrenareimpermanentandtendtoregress
injuries occurred during the study period, and the testing
towarduntrainedcontrolgroupvaluesduringthedetraining
protocol was reportedly well tolerated by the subjects.
period(29,87,125,205,227).Theprecisenatureofthedetrain-
In other reports, children and adolescents safely per-
ing response and the physiological adaptations that occur
formed 1RM strength tests using free weight exercises
during this period remain uncertain, although changes in
(14,22,118,124,142,152,153,178,198,238).
neuromuscular functioning and the hormonal responses to
Paradoxically,mostoftheforcesthatyouthareexposedto
resistance training and detraining should be considered. Of
in various sports and recreational activities are likely to be
interest,researchersfoundthattraining-inducedincreasesin
greater in both exposure time and magnitude than compe-
thelevelsoftestosteroneandfreeandrogenindexinchildren
tently supervised and properly performed maximal strength
weremaintainedduringan8-weekdetrainingperioddespite
tests.Theseobservationsalongwithcurrentresearchfindings
the regression of strength toward untrained control group
indicate that the maximal force–producing capabilities of
values during this phase of the study (226,227).
healthy children and adolescents can be safely evaluated by
Onlyalimitednumberofstudieshaveevaluatedtheeffects
1RMtestingprocedures,providedthatyouthparticipateinan
of training frequency on the maintenance of strength and
habituation period before testing to learn proper exercise
powerinchildrenandadolescents.After20weeksofprogres-
technique and qualified professionals closely supervise and
siveresistancetraining,aonce-weeklymaintenancetraining
administereachtest.Detailedproceduresforevaluating1RM
programwasnotadequatetomaintainthetraining-induced
strengthareavailableelsewhere(81,140).
strength gains in preadolescent males (29). Conversely, a
Althoughmaximalstrengthtestingcanbeusedtoevaluate
once-weeklymaintenanceprogramwasjustassufficientasa
training-induced changes in muscular strength in children
twice-weeklymaintenanceprograminretainingthestrength
and adolescents in clinical and recreational settings, when
gainsmadeafter12weeksofresistancetraininginagroupof
properlyadministered1RMtestsarelaborintensiveandtime
adolescentmaleathletes(55).Othersobservedthatchildren
consuming.Thus,insomeinstances(e.g.,physicaleducation
who participated in a 10-week plyometric training program
class) the use of field-based measures may be more
were able to maintain training-induced gains in power after
appropriateandtimeefficient.Researchershavedocumented
8weeksofreducedtraining,whichincludedsoccerpractice
significantcorrelationsbetween1RMstrengthandcommon
(56). Clearly, more research is needed before specific main-
field measures (e.g., handgrip strength and long jump) in
tenance training recommendations can be made.
children(164).Inanycase,unsupervisedandimproper1RM
ProgramEvaluationandTesting testing (e.g., inadequate progression of loading and poor
Factorssuchaspreviousexerciseexperience,programdesign, lifting technique) should not be performed by children or
specificityoftestingandtraining,choiceofequipment,quality adolescents under any circumstances due to the real risk of
of instruction, and whether or not the learning effect was injury (189,190).
controlled for in the study can directly influence the degree
of measured strength change. In addition, the methods of PhysiologicalMechanismsforStrengthDevelopment
evaluating changes in muscular strength consequent to Inchildrenitappearsthattraining-inducedstrengthgainsare
trainingarenoteworthyconsiderations.Insomestudies,the more related to neural mechanisms than to hypertrophic
subjects were trained and tested using different modalities factors (139,147,178,186,200). Without adequate levels of
(180,205,246), and in other published reports, strength circulatingtestosteronetostimulateincreasesinmusclesize,
changes were evaluated by relatively high RM values (e.g., childrenappeartoexperiencemoredifficultyincreasingtheir
10RM) (74,88,144,248). Strength changes have also been muscle mass consequent to a resistance training program
evaluated by maximal load lifting (e.g., 1RM) on the equip- (up to 20 weeks) as compared with older populations
ment used in training (22,55,79,80,118,178,183,186,198,238). (178,186,239). However, because some findings are at
Somecliniciansandresearchershavenotused1RMtesting variance with this suggestion (100,158), it cannot be stated
to evaluate training-induced changes in muscular strength a priori that resistance training will not increase the muscle
because ofthepresumption thathigh-intensityloadingmay massofprepubescentyouth.Itispossiblethatmoreintensive
S64 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 6 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
training programs, longer training durations, and more being,improvemotorperformanceskills,andincreaseayoung
sensitive measuring techniques that are ethically appro- athletes’ resistance to sports-relatedinjuries.
priate for this population may be needed to partition the Research that supports the utility of youth resistance
effectsoftrainingonfatfreemassfromexpectedgainsdueto training in the acquisition of favorable degrees of health-
growth and maturation. associated characteristics is expanding (67,147,219). More-
Withoutcorrespondingincreasesinfat-freemass,itappears over, the contention that the overall health of children and
thatneuraladaptations(i.e.,atrendtowardincreasedmotor adolescents is likely to improve rather than be adversely
unit activation and changes in motor unit coordination, affected by regular participation in a resistance training
recruitment, and firing) (178,186) and possibly intrinsic program is supported by statements from professional
muscle adaptations (as evidenced by increases in twitch organizations(8,18,33,167,192).Althoughgoodhealthhabits
torque) (186) are primarily responsible for training-induced established during childhood do not always carry over into
strength gains during preadolescence. Improvements in adulthood,thepotentialpositiveinfluenceofthesehabitson
motorskillperformanceandthecoordinationoftheinvolved the adult lifestyle should be recognized (146,196,222,225).
muscle groups may also play a significant role because Hence, a compelling reason to encourage children and
measuredincreasesintraining-inducedstrengtharetypically adolescents to participate regularly in physical activity is to
greater than changes in neuromuscular activation (178,186). reduce their risk of developing adult diseases later in life.
Although speculative, developmental alterations in muscle
fiberarchitecture(e.g.,pennationangle)andchangesincen- Cardiovascular Risk Profile. The potential influence of resis-
tralinhibitoryinfluencesonmaximalmusclestrengthshould tancetrainingonbodycomposition(thepercentageoftotal
also be considered (195). In support of these observations, bodyweightthatisfatcomparedwiththepercentagethatis
several training studies have reported significant improve- fatfree)hasbecomeanimportanttopicofinvestigation,given
ments in strength during preadolescence without corre- that the prevalence of obesity among children and adoles-
sponding increases in gross limb morphology, as compared cents continues to increase worldwide (175,240). Today,
with a similar control group (88,144,178,186,199,246). childhood obesity, with itsassociatedcomorbidities suchas
Duringpuberty,testiculartestosteronesecretioninmalesis type2diabetesandlikelihoodofpersistenceintoadulthood,
associated with considerable increases in fat-free mass and is a critical public health threat (126). Although genetic,
linear growth (139,195). Training-induced strength gains psychosocial, economic, and environmental factors likely
duringandafterpubertyinmalesmaythereforebeassociated play a role in the development of obesity during childhood
with changes in hypertrophic factors because testosterone andadolescence(4,62),itisbecomingmoreapparentthatthe
and other hormonal influences on muscle hypertrophy increasing prevalence of obesity among school-aged youth
would be operant (139). Smaller amounts of testosterone in maybedue,atleastinpart,toasedentarylifestyle(62,106).
females(resultingfromenzymaticconversionofandrogenic Althoughobeseyouthhavetraditionallybeenencouraged
precursors in the adrenal gland) limit the magnitude of toparticipateinaerobicactivities,excessbodyweighthinders
training-inducedincreasesinmusclehypertrophy(195,200). the performance of weight-bearing physical activities such
Other hormone and growth factors (e.g., growth hormone as jogging and increases the risk of musculoskeletal overuse
and insulin-like growth factors) may be at least partly injuries.Furthermore,obeseyouthoftenlackthemotorskills
responsible for muscle development in females (135). andconfidencetobephysicallyactive,andtheymayactually
perceiveprolongedperiodsofaerobicexercisetobeboringor
discomforting. In support of these observations, it has been
PotentialHealthandFitnessBenefits reportedthattotalbodyfatwasinverselyrelatedtominutes
There are many health and fitness benefits associated with of vigorous physical activity per day in youth (54). Others
regularphysicalactivityinchildrenandadolescents.Notonly observedthatthisdeclineinphysicalactivitymaystartearly
ishabitual physical activity essential for normal growth and in life in obese youth (103).
development,butalsoparticipationinage-appropriatefitness Recently,ithasbeensuggestedthatresistancetrainingmay
programs can enhance the physical and psychosocial well- offer observable health value to obese children and adoles-
beingofyouth.Althoughamajorityofthepediatricresearch cents (23,83,243). Obese youth tend to enjoy resistance
hasfocusedonactivitiesthatenhancecardiorespiratoryfitness trainingbecauseitistypicallycharacterizedbyshortperiods
(195),recentfindingsindicatethatresistancetrainingcanoffer of physical activity interspersed with brief rest periods
unique benefits for children and adolescents when appropri- between sets and exercises, which is more consistent with
ately prescribed and supervised. As previously observed in how youth move and play (13,106). Several studies have
adults (97), regular participation in a resistance training reportedfavorablechangesinbodycompositioninchildren
program has the potential to positively influence several and adolescents who were obese or at risk for obesity after
measurable indices of health and fitness. Youth resistance participation in a resistance training program or a circuit
trainingcanimproveone’scardiovascularriskprofile,facilitate weight training (i.e., combined resistance and aerobic train-
weight control, strengthen bone, enhance psychosocial well- ing) program (24,203,206,214,220,224,242,254). In a report,
S65
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 7 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
the level of adiposity in school-aged youth was a strong associated with weight-bearing activities (15,121,230,235).
negative predictor of the resistance training effect in the Indeed, weight-bearing physical activity is essential for
lower limbs (93). Thus, obese youth may need a higher normal bone formation and growth (148). If age-specific
relative training intensity to produce the desired effect. resistance training guidelines are followed and if nutritional
Of interest, researchers found that participation in a 16- recommendations (e.g., adequate calcium) are adhered to,
week resistance training program significantly decreased regular participation in a resistance training program can
body fat and significantly increased insulin sensitivity in maximizebonemineraldensityduringchildhoodandadoles-
adolescentmaleswhowereatriskforobesity(206).Because cence(230,235,238).Moreover,thereisnodetrimentaleffect
the increase in insulin sensitively remained significant after of resistance training on linear growth in children and
adjustmentforchangesintotalfatmassandtotalleanmass,it adolescents (91,147)
appearedthatregularresistancetrainingmayhaveresultedin Results from several research studies indicate thatregular
qualitative changes in skeletal muscle that contributed participation in sports and specialized fitness programs that
to enhanced insulin action. Compliance to this program include resistance training can be a potent osteogenic
wasimpressivewith 96%oftheparticipantscompleting the stimulus in youth (16,20,50,145,154,166,173,237,241). It has
program. Other researchers identified muscular strength as been reported that adolescent weightlifters displayed levels
an independent and powerful predictor of better insulin ofbonemineraldensity(50)andbonemineralcontent(237)
sensitivityinyouthaged10–15years(21).Becauseresistance wellabovevaluesofage-matchedcontrols.Otherresearchers
training may provide a more enjoyable and sustainable found that weightlifting can impart some benefit on bone
approach to health-related physical activity promotion in developmentinyouthbutnotasmuchasyear-roundsoccer
childrenandadolescentswhoareobeseoratriskforobesity, (20). The repetitive exposure to physical loading in sports
additionalrandomizedcontrolledtrialsareneededtofurther such as gymnastics has also resulted in significantly higher
examinetheeffectsofresistancetrainingonmetabolichealth bone mineral density in young athletes as compared with
outcomes in youth. age-matched controls (16,241).
At present, there is no clear association between regular In a study that provides direct evidence that high-impact
physicalactivityandreducingbloodpressureinnormotensive exercise enhances bone accrual in preadolescent girls,
youth,althoughlimiteddatasuggestthatresistancetraining participation in a 10-month physical activity program
maybeaneffectivenonpharmacologicinterventioninhyper- (combined resistance trainingand aerobic exercise) resulted
tensiveadolescents,providedthatsubmaximalloadsareused in significant improvements in bone mineral density in the
and proper exercise procedures are followed (112). Others exercise group as compared with the control group (166).
haverecommendedlow-intensity,high-repetition resistance Likewise,preadolescentboyswhoperformedahigh-impact
trainingforhypertensiveadolescentswhowanttoexperience circuit exercise program for 20 months had greater bone
thistypeoftraining(256).Althoughtheacutebloodpressure expansion on both the periosteal and endosteal surfaces
responsetoresistanceexerciseisreportedlysimilarbetween (145). Others noted that a school-based physical activity
children and adults (172), blackouts (loss of consciousness) interventionthatincludedplyometrictrainingenhancedbone
andchronichypertension,whichhavebeenreportedinadult massattheweight-bearingproximalfemurinchildren(154).
competitive weightlifters (49), have not been reported in Although peak bone mass is influenced by genetics (43),
children(88,187)oradolescents(112)afterresistancetraining. regular participation in high-strain-eliciting sports and
Theeffects of resistance training on blood lipoproteins in specialized exercise such as resistance training may have
youth are not well documented. Limited data suggest that adesirableinfluenceonbonehealthinchildrenandadoles-
when compared with an inactive control group, resistance cents. It appears that the osteogenic response to exercise in
trainingcharacterizedbymoderateloadsandahighnumber youth can be enhanced by sensibly prescribing multi-joint,
ofrepetitionscanhaveapositiveinfluenceonthebloodlipid moderate to high intensity resistance training exercises
profile of children (220,247), and similar trends have been (e.g., bench press, squat, and weightlifting movements) and
observed in adolescents (98). Because changes in body unaccustomed plyometric exercises (e.g., jumping and
compositionandnutritionalintakemayinfluencelipoprotein hopping). Although additional clinical trials are needed to
concentrationsinyouth,acomprehensivehealth-enhancing more precisely define the exercise prescription, the impor-
program that includes regular physical activity, behavioral tance of maintaining participation in sports and specialized
counseling,andnutritioneducationmaybemosteffectivefor activities throughout life must not be overlooked because
improvingthebloodlipidprofileinyouthwithdyslipidemia(7). training-induced improvements in bone health may be lost
over time if the program is not continued (110).
Bone Health. Despitetraditionalfearsthatresistancetraining
wouldbeharmfultotheimmatureskeletalofyouth,current Psychosocial Health and Well-being. Data from adult studies
observationssuggestthatchildhoodandadolescencemaybe suggestthat theeffectsofresistance trainingextend beyond
the opportune time for the bone modeling and remodeling physicalmeasuresandincludeimprovementsinmentalhealth
process to respond to the tensile and compressive forces and well-being (157,228,229). Although it is reasonable to
S66 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 8 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
assume that similar findings would be observed in children selected motor performance skills after several weeks of
and adolescents who participate in a resistance training resistance training. Because the effects of resistance training
program, caution is needed in extending observations to on motor performance are dependent on the design of the
younger populations because of the psychological immatu- trainingprogram,theprincipleoftrainingspecificityshould
rity of youth as compared with adults. Limited evidence be considered when evaluating these data. As previously
suggeststhatresistancetrainingmaypositivelyinfluencethe observed in adult populations (97), training adaptations in
psychologicalwell-beingofchildren(123,253).Othersnoted childrenandadolescentsareratherspecifictothemovement
significant improvements in mood and self-appraisal factors pattern, velocity of movement, contraction type, and con-
in children who participated in a physical activity program traction force (113,174).Thus, irrespective of age, resistance
that included resistance training and aerobic games (10). training programs that include specific exercises (e.g.,
Conversely, no significant changes in self-concept were weightlifting movements and plyometrics) and types of
found in children after resistance training in other studies muscleactionsinamannerthatisspecificforwhichtraining
(89,198), although initial scores in psychological measures is being performed are more likely to result in the greatest
were relatively high in these reports. Although speculative, improvements in motor skill performance.
thepsychologicalbenefitsofresistancetrainingmaybemost Although the potential for resistance training to enhance
apparent in youth who begin training with below average the sports performance of young athletes seems reasonable,
measures of strength and psychosocial well-being. scientificevaluationsofthisobservationaredifficultbecause
Ofinterest,clinicianshavenotedthatthesocializationand athletic performance is such a multivariate outcome. Two
mentaldisciplineexhibitedbychildrenwhoresistancetrained studies (26,37) reported favorable changes in swim perfor-
were similar to those exhibited by team sport participants manceinagegroupswimmers,althoughonestudyfoundno
(187), and children’s attitudes toward physical education, significant difference in freestyle turning performance in
physical fitness, and lifelong exercise reportedly improved adolescent swimmers who performed 15 minutes of plyo-
afteraconditioningprogramthatincludedresistancetraining metric training for 20 weeks (51). In another report,
(249,250). If appropriate resistance training guidelines are researchers found significant correlations between balance
followed and if children and adolescents are encouraged andskatingspeedinjunioricehockeyplayersyoungerthan
to embrace self-improvement and feel good about their 19 years (19). Other studies involving young basketball and
performances, the positive psychosocial effects of resistance soccer players have noted the importance of incorporating
training programs may indeed be comparable with other sometypeofresistancetrainingintosportstrainingsessions
sportsandrecreationalactivities.Conversely,intensivetrain- to maximize gains in strength and power in young athletes
ing,overzealouscoaching,andexcessivepressuretoperform (46,233). Although most published reports and anecdotal
atalevelbeyondone’scapabilitiescanhaveanegativeeffect comments from youth coaches suggest that regular partic-
on some youth who are emotionally and psychologically ipation in a well-designed resistance training program will
vulnerable (3,42). In some cases, inappropriate coaching result in some degree of improvement in athletic perfor-
methods, unethical training practices, or an emphasis on mance (84,137,163), further research is still required in this
leanness may lead to the abuse of performance-enhancing important field of study.
drugs (122), restrictive eating behaviors (171), or burnout Todate,therehavenotbeenanylong-terminvestigations
(overtraining syndrome) (32). studying the effects of a comprehensive youth resistance
training program on sports performance during the adult
MotorPerformanceSkillsandSportsPerformance.Improvements years,althoughtheoreticalmodelshighlightingthepotential
inselectedmotorperformanceskills(e.g.,longjump,vertical benefits have been proposed (130). Nevertheless, based on
jump, sprint speed, and medicine ball toss) have been the available evidence, curtailment of sports practice and
observedinchildrenandadolescentsafterresistancetraining competitions during the developmental years to allow time
with weight machines, free weights, body weight strength for fitness conditioning that includes resistance training
exercises, and medicine balls (77,92,96,118,144,221,246). seems reasonable, providing that the training program is
Gains in motor performance skills in youth have also been competently supervised, is progressive, and is of sufficient
noted after regular participation in plyometric training duration and intensity. Because aspiring young athletes
programs (36,134,151,216). More recently, researchers have cannot play themselves into shape, one of the greatest
reported that the combination of resistance training and benefits of youth resistance training may be its ability to
plyometrictrainingmayofferthemostbenefitforadolescent better prepare children and adolescents for successful and
athletes (75,143,168,202). As previously observed in adults enjoyable participation in athletic activities.
(2,95), the effects of resistance training and plyometric
training may actually be synergistic, with their combined Sports-Related Injuries. The number of children and adoles-
effects being greater than each program performed alone. cents in school-sponsored and community-based sports
In contrast, other studies (80,88,96) reported significant programs continues to increase. However, along with this
gains in strength without concomitant improvements in increaseinsportsparticipationhascomenumerousreportsof
S67
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 9 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
injuries to the ill-prepared or improperly trained young thatincludesplyometricexercises,resistancetraining,balance
athlete (3,40,64,162). Sports-related injuries have become skills, and education may reduce the likelihood of sports-
a significant cause of hospitalization and health care costs relatedinjuriesinyoungathletes.Yetsomedatasuggestthat
during childhood and adolescence (162), and it is possible onlyaminorityofyoungathletesparticipateincomprehen-
that certain youth sport injuries can increase the risk of sive conditioning programs before sports participation (34).
osteoarthritislaterinlife(61).Sports-relatedinjuriesarealso Clearly, there is an ongoing need for school- or coach-
onereasonwhysomeyoungathletesdropoutofsports(109). sponsored involvement to ensure that all young athletes
Although thetotal elimination ofsports-relatedinjuries is participate in multi-component conditioning programs
an unrealistic goal, appropriately designed and sensibly before sports training and competition.
progressed fitness conditioning programs that include resis- However, the addition of preseason conditioning to the
tance training may help reduce the likelihood of sports- total exercise dose, which includes free play as well as
relatedinjuriesinyoungathletes(1,119,161,212).Inagrowing organizedsports,shouldbecarefullyconsideredbecausethis
numberofcases,itseemsthataspiringyoungathletesareill typeoftrainingaddstothechronic,repetitivestressplacedon
preparedforthedemandsofsportspracticeandcompetition thedevelopingmusculoskeletalsystem.Someyoungathletes
(64,162).Byaddressingtheriskfactorsassociatedwithyouth with relatively immature musculoskeletal systems may be
sportinjuries(e.g.,previousinjury,poorconditioning,muscle intolerantofthesameexercisedosethatthemajorityofthe
imbalances,anderrorsintraining),ithasbeensuggestedthat athletes in the same program can tolerate. This biologic
bothacuteandoveruseinjuriescouldbereducedby15–50% uniqueness in growing athletes can result in stress fracture
(161). Although there are many mechanisms to potentially syndromes manifested by a variety of conditions such as
reduce sports-related injuries in young athletes (e.g., coach- tractionapophysitis,injuriestothedevelopingjointsurfaces,
ing education, safe equipment, proper nutrition), enhancing orinjuriestotheimmaturespine(3,159,177).
physical fitness as a preventative health measure should Becauseoftheinterindividualvariabilityofstresstolerance,
be considered a cornerstone of multicomponent treatment eachchildmustbetreatedasanindividualandobservedfor
programs. signs of incipient stress failure syndromes, which would
Comprehensive conditioning programs that included re- requireamodificationofthefrequency,volume,intensity,and
sistancetraining,plyometrictraining,orbothhaveprovento progressionoftraining.Withtheawarenessofthisvariability
beaneffectivestrategyforreducingsports-relatedinjuriesin in children and adolescents of the same age to accept and
adolescent athletes (39,60,115,116,120,149,176), and it is toleratestress,manyofthesestressfailuresyndromescanbe
possible that similar effects would be observed in children, prevented.Insomeinstances,itmaybenecessaryforyoung
although additional research is needed to support this athletes to reduce their sport involvement to allow time for
contention. Preseason conditioning programs that included preparatorystrengthandconditioningwithadequaterestand
resistance training decreased the number and severity of recovery between training sessions. A reduction in per-
injuries in high school football players (39) and, similarly, formance and an increased risk of injury can result by fre-
decreasedtheincidenceofinjuryinadolescentsoccerplayers quent training sessions without adequate rest and recovery
(115). Others observed that balance training (63,65) or in-between(99).
balance trainingand strengthening exercises (244,245) were There is insufficient evidence to decide for or against
effective in reducing sports-related injuries in adolescent improvements in subjective ‘‘energy’’ level, sleep patterns,
athletes. emotionalmaturity,immunefunction,nutritionalstatus,cog-
Becauseoftherelativelyhighincidenceofkneeinjuriesin nitive performance, or health care utilization. It is probable
young female athletes as compared with males (185), thateitherthesecharacteristicswouldbefavorablyalteredor
researchers have investigated the effects of various training at least not unfavorably influenced by resistance training,
programs on injury rates in young female subjects. Of note, providingthattheprogramisproperlydesigned,pleasurable,
preseason conditioning programs that included plyometric andrewarding.
exercises, resistance training, and education on jumping
mechanics significantlyreduced the number ofserious knee YouthResistanceTrainingGuidelines
injuries in adolescent female athletes (120,149). Conversely, Aprerequisiteforthedevelopmentandadministrationofsafe,
no significant differences in injury rates were observed in effective,andenjoyableyouthresistancetrainingprogramsis
adolescent female athletes who participated in an in-season an understanding of established training principles and an
plyometric training program (181) or structured warm-up appreciationforthephysicalandpsychosocialuniquenessof
activitiesthatincludedstrength,balance,andagilityexercises childrenandadolescents.Althoughthereisnominimumage
(217).Differencesinthedesignofthetrainingprogramsand requirementatwhichchildrencanbeginresistancetraining,
time of implementation (i.e., preseason vs. in-season) could all participants must be mentally and physically ready to
explain, at least in part, these conflicting results. comply with coaching instructions and undergo the stress
Collectively, a majority of the evidence suggests that of a training program. In general, if a child is ready for
regular participation in a preseason conditioning program participation in sport activities (generally age 7 or 8 years),
S68 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 10 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
then he or she isready for some type of resistance training. youth resistance training programs can improve program
Although a medical examination before participation in adherence and optimize strength gains (53). Although all
a youth resistance training program is not mandatory for trainingsessionsshouldbesupervisedbyaqualifiedadult(or
apparently healthy children, a medical examination is severaladultsdependingonclasssize),additionalsupervision
recommendedforyouthwithsignsorsymptomssuggestive may be needed during the first few weeks of the resistance
ofdiseaseandforyouthwithknowndisease. training program when participants are learning proper
Instructionandsupervisionshouldbeprovidedbyqualified exercise technique and training procedures. Adults should
adultswhohaveanunderstandingofyouthresistancetraining presentinformationtochildrenandadolescentsinastyleand
guidelines and who are knowledgeable of the physical and languagethatisappropriatefortheirlevelofunderstanding,
psychosocialuniquenessofchildrenandadolescents.More- and positive, encouraging feedbackshould beusedtofoster
over, teachers, personal fitness trainers, and youth coaches feelings of competence and reduce anxiety (188). All
should develop an appropriate philosophy about training participants should be encouraged to ask questions and
youththatisconsistentwiththeneeds,goals,andinterestsof freelystatetheirconcernsabouttheprogram.Charts,posters,
childrenandadolescents.Ideally,adultswhoteachandcoach and workout cards that promote proper exercise technique
youth resistance training should have practical experience and realistic expectations are helpful.
working with children and adolescents, a recognized pro- Various combinations of resistance training program
fessionalcertification(e.g.,NationalStrengthandCondition- variables have proven to be safe and effective for children,
ingAssociation[NSCA]CertifiedStrengthandConditioning providing that program developers used scientific informa-
SpecialistorNSCACertifiedPersonalTrainer),andalevelof tion, established training principles, and common sense. All
knowledge commensuratewith acollege degreein physical youthresistancetrainingprogramsshouldincludeinstruction
education, exercise science, or a related field. For youths on proper lifting techniques, safety procedures, and specific
participatinginadvancedtrainingprograms,coachesshould methodsofprogression.Becausetheactofresistancetraining
have additional knowledge and practical experience to itselfdoesnotensurethatoptimalgainsinstrengthandpower
properlyinstructandsensiblyprescribeoradvancethistype willberealized,theidealapproachistoincorporateresistance
oftraining.Althoughlessexperiencedsupervisorsmayassist trainingintoaprogressiveconditioningprograminwhichthe
in the organization and implementation of youth resistance volumeandintensityoftrainingchangethroughouttheyear
trainingprograms,itisunlikelytheywillbeabletoprovidethe (141). It is the systematic structuring of program variables
quality of care and instruction needed for more advanced along with individual effort and qualified instruction that
training. If qualified supervision, age-appropriate exercise will determine the outcomes associated with resistance
equipment,andasafetrainingenvironmentarenotavailable, training.Finally,childrenandadolescentsmustnotbetreated
youth should not perform resistance exercise due to the asminiatureadults,norshouldadultexerciseguidelinesand
increasedriskofinjury(107,132). training philosophies be imposed on youth.
Basiceducationonweightroometiquette,properexercise The program variables that should be considered when
technique,individualgoals,andrealisticoutcomesshouldbe designing a youth resistance training program include (a)
part of youth resistance training programs. All participants warm-upandcool-down,(b)choiceandorderofexercise,(c)
should receive instruction on safety concerns including the trainingintensityandvolume,(d)restintervalsbetweensets
correct use of collars; appropriate spotting procedures; and exercises, (e) repetition velocity, (f) training frequency,
the proper storage of exercise equipment; the appropriate and (g) program variation. Table 1 summarizes youth
handling of barbells, dumbbells, and plates; and sensible resistance training guidelines. A more detailed description
startingweights.Thisisparticularlyimportantforuntrained of youth resistance program variables and training consid-
childrenwhooftenoverestimatetheirphysicalabilities(184) erations is available elsewhere (47,84,130,137,156,192).
and who may not be aware of the inherent risks associated
with resistance training exercise equipment. Instead of Warm-up and Cool-down. Over the past few years, long-held
competing against each other, youth should be encouraged beliefs regarding the routine practice of warm-up static
to embrace self-improvement and feel good about their stretchinghavebeenquestioned(133,208,223).Anacutebout
performances (e.g., the ability to correctly perform a multi- ofstaticstretchinghasbeenfoundtohaveanegativeimpact
joint lift). The importance of creating an enjoyable exercise on strength and power performance in adults (208), and
experience for all participants should not be overlooked similarfindingshavebeenreportedinadolescents(155,257).
becauseenjoymenthasbeenshowntomediatetheeffectsof In recent times, there has been rising interest in warm-up
youth physical activity programs (58). Adults should teach procedures thatinvolvetheperformance ofdynamic move-
youth about their bodies as well as the potential benefits of ments (e.g., hops, skips, jumps, and movement-based
ahealthylifestyle(e.g.,propernutrition,adequatesleep,stress exercisesfortheupperand lowerbody)designedtoelevate
management, and regular physical activity) (129). core body temperature, enhance motor unit excitability,
Qualified and enthusiastic instruction not only enhance improve kinesthetic awareness, and maximize active ranges
participantsafetyandenjoymentbutalsodirectsupervisionof of motion (73,191). This type of dynamic warm-up may
S69
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 11 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
TABLE1.General youthresistance training guidelines.
(cid:1)Provide qualifiedinstruction andsupervision
(cid:1)Ensuretheexercise environment issafeandfreeofhazards
(cid:1)Starteach trainingsessionwitha5-to10-minute dynamicwarm-upperiod
(cid:1)Begin withrelativelylight loadsandalwaysfocusonthecorrect exercise technique
(cid:1)Perform 1–3setsof6–15repetitionsona varietyofupper-andlower-body strengthexercises
(cid:1)Include specific exercisesthatstrengthentheabdominalandlowerbackregion
(cid:1)Focusonsymmetrical musculardevelopmentandappropriatemusclebalance aroundjoints
(cid:1)Perform 1–3setsof3–6repetitionsonavariety ofupper-andlower-bodypowerexercises
(cid:1)Sensiblyprogress thetrainingprogram dependingon needs,goals,andabilities
(cid:1)Increasetheresistance gradually(5–10%) asstrength improves
(cid:1)Cool-down withless intensecalisthenics andstatic stretching
(cid:1)Listentoindividual needsandconcerns throughouteach session
(cid:1)Begin resistancetraining 2–3timesperweekonnonconsecutive days
(cid:1)Useindividualized workoutlogstomonitorprogress
(cid:1)Keeptheprogramfreshandchallenging bysystematically varying thetrainingprogram
(cid:1)Optimize performance andrecovery withhealthynutrition, properhydration, andadequate sleep
(cid:1)Supportandencouragement frominstructorsandparentswill helpmaintaininterest
create an optimal environment for resistance training by exercise programs. It is reasonable to start with relatively
enhancing neuromuscular function (191,201). It has been simple exercises and gradually progress to more advanced
reported that warm-up protocols that include moderate to multi-joint movements as confidence and competence
high intensity dynamic movements can enhance power improve. However, in some cases (e.g., weightlifting class),
performance in youth (68,71,76,209). it may be appropriate to start with multi-joint movements,
Intheabsenceofsufficientevidencetoendorsepre-event provided that light loads are used and the focus is on
static stretching with respect to performance enhancement, enhancing fundamental movement patterns. Regardless of
the potential impact of pre-event dynamic exercise on themodeofexercise,theconcentricandeccentricphasesof
anaerobic fitness performance should be considered. In each lift should be performed in a controlled manner with
addition to potential physiological benefits, a well-designed properexercisetechnique.
dynamic warm-up can also set the tone for the training Therearemanywaystoarrangethesequenceofexercises
session and establish a desired tempo for the upcoming inaresistancetrainingsession.Mostyouthwillperformtotal
activities.Areasonablesuggestionistoperform5–10minutes body workouts several times per week, which involve
of dynamic activities during the warm-up period and less multiple exercises stressing all major muscle groups each
intense calisthenics and static stretching at the end of the session.Inthistypeofworkout,largemusclegroupexercises
workout. A cool-down period consisting of general calis- shouldbeperformedbeforesmallermusclegroupexercises,
thenics and static stretching can help relax the body and andmulti-jointexercisesshouldbeperformedbeforesingle-
improve flexibility. Moreover, regular long-term stretching jointexercises.Itisalsohelpfultoperformmorechallenging
(not performed during the warm-up) may improve perfor- exercises earlier in the workout when the neuromuscular
manceandmayreducetheriskofinjury(208,218).Duringthe system is less fatigued. Thus, if a child is learning how to
cool-down period, it is often worthwhile to reflect on what perform a weightlifting movement or a plyometric exercise,
each participant learned and review training objectives for thistypeofexerciseshouldbeperformedearlyinthetraining
the next session. session so that the child can practice the exercise without
unduefatigue.
Choice and Order of Exercise. Althoughalimitlessnumberof
exercises can be used to enhance muscular fitness, it is Training Intensity and Volume. Training intensity typically
importanttoselectexercisesthatareappropriateforachild’s referstotheamountofresistanceusedforaspecificexercise,
body size, fitness level, and exercise technique experience. whereastrainingvolumegenerallyreferstothetotalamount
Also,thechoiceofexercisesshouldpromotemusclebalance of work performed in a training session. Although both of
across joints and between opposing muscle groups (e.g., these program variables are significant, training intensity is
quadriceps and hamstrings). Weight machines (both child oneofthemoreimportantfactorsinthedesignofaresistance
sized and adult sized) as well as free weights, elastic bands, training program. However, to maximize gains in muscular
medicineballs,andbodyweightexerciseshavebeenusedby fitnessandreducetheriskofinjury,youthmustfirstlearnhow
children and adolescents in clinical- and school-based to perform each exercise correctly with a light load (e.g.,
S70 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 12 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
unloaded barbell) and then gradually progress the training RestIntervalsBetweenSetsandExercises.Thelengthoftherest
intensity,orvolume,orboth,withoutcompromisingexercise interval between sets and exercises is a program variable
techniquetoliftheavierloads. of primary importance to coaches, teachers, athletes, and
If1RMtestsarenotperformed,asimpleapproachmaybe researchers(251).Becauseacuteforceandpowerproduction
to first establish the repetition range and then by trial and may becompromised iftherestinterval istoo short,longer
error determine the maximum load that can be handled for rest intervals of at least 2–3 minutes for primary, multi-
theprescribedrange.Forexample,achildoradolescentmay ple-joint exercises are typically recommended during adult
beginresistancetrainingwith1or2setsof10–15repetitions resistance training programs (136). However, rest interval
with a relatively light or moderate load to develop proper recommendationsforadultsmaynotbeconsistentwiththe
exercise technique. Depending on individuals’ needs, goals, needs and abilities of younger populations due to growth-
and abilities, over time the program can be progressed to and maturation-related differences in response to physical
includeadditionalsetswithheavierloads(e.g.,6to10RM)on exertion.Studieshaveshownthatchildrenareabletorecover
large muscle group exercises to maximize gains in muscle from high-intensity, short-term, intermittent exercise faster
strengthandpower.Althoughadditionaltrainingstudiesare than adults (82,90,255).
needed to explore the effects of different resistance training Although few data examining the effects of rest interval
programs on youth, multiple-set training protocols have length on strength performance in younger populations are
proventobemoreeffectivethansingle-setprotocolsinadults available, it appears that children and adolescents can resist
(136), and it is likely that similar findings would occur in fatiguetoagreaterextentthanadultsduringseveralrepeated
children and adolescents over the long-term. sets of resistance exercise (82,213,255). Thus, a shorter rest
With a careful prescription of sets and repetitions, the interval(about1minute)maysufficeinchildrenandadoles-
trainingstimuluswillremaineffectiveandthereforetheeffort centswhenperformingamoderate-intensityresistanceexer-
tobenefitratiowillbemaximized.However,itisimportantto cise protocol, although the likelihood that adolescents may
realizethatnotallexercisesneedtobeperformedforthesame fatigue more rapidly than children should be considered.
number of sets and repetitions. For example, an adolescent Obviously, training intensity, training volume, exercise
withresistancetrainingexperiencemayperform3setsof6–8 choice, and fitness level will influence the length of the rest
repetitionsonmulti-jointexercises(e.g.,backsquatandbench interval. Some youngathletes (e.g., adolescent weightlifters)
press) with a relatively heavy weight and 2 sets of 10–12 whoperformexercisesthatrequirehigherlevelsofpoweror
repetitions on single-joint exercises (e.g., biceps curl and skill may require longer rest intervals (e.g., 2–3 minutes)
triceps extension) with a relatively moderate weight. Of between sets and trials during practice and competition to
interest,findingsfromadultstudiesindicatethatthenumber maintain muscle performance.
ofrepetitionsthatcanbeperformedatagivenpercentageof
the 1RM is influenced by the amount of muscle mass used RepetitionVelocity.Thevelocityorcadenceatwhichastrength
duringanexercise(207),andsimilarobservationshavebeen exerciseisperformedcanaffecttheadaptationstoatraining
reported in children (85). program(136).Becauseyouthneedtolearnhowtoperform
Due to the relatively intense nature of power exercises each exercise correctly with a relatively light load, it is
(e.g.,plyometricorweightliftingmovements),fewerthan6–8 generally recommended that youth resistance train in
repetitions per set are typically recommended for youth. a controlled manner at a moderate velocity. However,
Unlike traditional strength-building exercises, power exer- different training velocities may be used depending on the
cises are explosive but highly controlled movements that choice of exercise. For example, plyometric exercises and
require a high degree of technical skill. Because fatigue can weightliftingmovementsareexplosivebuthighlycontrolled
influence the performance of power exercises, it is recom- movements that should be performed at a high velocity.
mended that youth perform fewer quality repetitions to Although additional research is needed, it is likely that the
maintain movement speed and efficiency for all repetitions performance ofdifferent trainingvelocitieswithinatraining
withinaset. program may provide the most effective resistance training
Inanattempttoaidintheexerciseprescription,researchers stimulus.
have developed prediction equations based on repetitions
performedtofatigue with asubmaximalload (124,142,152). Training Frequency. A resistance training frequency of 2–3
In general, it was found that 1RM strength on selected timesperweekonnonconsecutivedaysisrecommendedfor
exercises may be predicted with reasonable accuracy in children and adolescents. Limited evidence indicates that
young male and female athletes. Others have developed 1 d(cid:2)wk21 of resistance training may be suboptimal for
child-specific perceived exertion rating scales to assess the enhancingmuscularstrengthinyouth(29,79),althoughonce
exertional perceptionsof children during resistanceexercise per week training maybe effective in retaining the strength
(78,193). Subjective information from these scales can be gainsmadeafterresistancetraining(55).Ingeneral,atraining
usedtoassistintheprescriptionofeffectiveyouthresistance frequency of 2 or 3 times per week on nonconsecutive
training programs. days will allow for adequate recovery between sessions
S71
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 13 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
(48–72 hours between sessions) and will be effective for explosiveliftingvelocity.Althoughmulti-jointexercisessuch
enhancing strength and power in children and adolescents. aspowercleansandpushpresseshavebeenusedextensively
Although some young athletes may participate in strength for power training, proper technique must be stressed
andconditioningactivitiesmorethan3d(cid:2)wk21,factorssuch becausethequalityofeffortperrepetition(maximalvelocity)
as the training volume, training intensity, exercise selection, is critical to the performance of these lifts. A power
nutritionalintake,andsleephabitsneedtobeconsideredas component for novice and intermediate lifters consisting of
thesefactorsmayinfluenceone’sabilitytorecoverfromand 1–3setsof3–6repetitionsperformednottofailureshouldbe
adapttothetrainingprogram.Astrainingprogramsbecome integrated into the resistance training program. Although
more advanced (and potentially more frequent), the traditional repetition systems normally involve the perfor-
importance of reinforcing proper exercise technique and mance of successive repetitions with minimal pause in
training habits with less intense workouts during the week between each repetition, the performance of explosive
should not be overlooked. movementsdoesnotalwaysneedtoconformtothispattern.
Giventheimportanceoflearningproperexercisetechnique,
ProgramVariation.Byperiodicallyvaryingprogramvariables, everyrepetitionshouldbeinitiatedfromtheproperstarting
long-termperformancegainswillbeoptimized,boredomwill position. Hence, it may be advantageous for young
bereduced,andtheriskofoveruseinjurieswilllikelydecrease weightlifters to pause briefly between each repetition to
(136,138). The concept whereby a training program is resettheirstartingpositiontoensurethatoptimaltechnique
systematicallyvariedovertimeisknownasperiodization.In is achieved on every repetition.
thelongterm,periodizedresistancetrainingprograms(with For the purpose of this review, a ‘‘novice’’ refers to an
adequate recovery between training sessions) will allow individual who has no or limited resistance training
participantstomakeevengreatergainsbecausethebodywill experience (#2 to 3 months) or an individual who has not
be challenged to adapt to even greater demands. Although trained for several months. ‘‘Intermediate’’ refers to an
additionalresearchinvolvingyoungerpopulationsisneeded, individualwhohasapproximately3–12monthsofconsistent
itisreasonabletosuggestthatchildrenandadolescentswho resistance training experience. ‘‘Advanced’’ refers to those
participate in well-designed, periodized resistance training individuals with at least 12 months of resistance training
programs and continue to improve their health and fitness experience who also attained significant improvements in
may be more likely to adhere to their exercise programs. muscularstrengthandpower.
Furthermore,plannedchangesintheprogramvariablescan Although there is not one model of periodization, the
help prevent training plateaus, which are not uncommon general concept is to prioritize training goals and then
after the first 8–12 weeks of resistance training. developalong-termplanthatchangesthroughouttheyear.
Programvariablesforprogressionduringyouthresistance Byperiodicallyvaryingthetrainingintensity,trainingvolume,
training for strength and power are outlined in Table 2 and rest interval length, and exercise choice, the risk of over-
Table3,respectively.Regardlessofthetraininggoal,allyouth training may be minimized and potential for maintaining
shouldbeginwithalightloadandprogressgraduallytolearn training-induced gainscould bemaximized (99). It is worth
proper exercise technique and become skilled in various noting that periodized training programs should include
exercise procedures. Because both force and velocity periodsofactiverest(e.g.,1–3weeksrecoverybetweensport
components are important for power training, 2 loading seasons) to allow for physical and psychological recovery
strategiesarerequired,namely,moderatetoheavyloadsfor from the training sessions. This isparticularly important for
strength and light to moderate loads performed at an youth who represent different sports teams, specialize in 1
TABLE2.Recommendations forprogressionduring resistance trainingforstrength.*
Novice Intermediate Advanced
Muscle action ECCandCON ECCandCON ECCandCON
Exercise choice SJandMJ SJandMJ SJandMJ
Intensity 50–70%1RM 60–80%1RM 70–85%1RM
Volume 1–2sets310–15reps 2–3sets38–12reps $3sets36–10reps
Restintervals (min) 1 1–2 2–3
Velocity Moderate Moderate Moderate
Frequency(d(cid:2)wk21) 2–3 2–3 3–4
*ECC=eccentric;CON=concentric;SJ=singlejoint;MJ=multi-joint;1RM=1repetitionmaximum;rep=repetition.
S72 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 14 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
TABLE3.Recommendations forprogression duringresistance trainingfor power.*
Novice Intermediate Advanced
Muscleaction ECCandCON ECCandCON ECCandCON
Exercise choice MJ MJ MJ
Intensity 30–60%1RMVEL 30–60%1RMVEL 30–60%1RMVEL
60–70%1RMSTR 70to$80%1RMSTR
Volume 1–2sets33–6reps 2–3sets33–6reps $3sets31–6reps
Restintervals(min) 1 1–2 2–3
Velocity Moderate/fast Fast Fast
Frequency (d(cid:2)wk21) 2 2–3 2–3
*ECC = eccentric; CON = concentric; MJ = multi-joint; 1RM = 1 repetition maximum; VEL = velocity; STR = strength;
rep=repetition.
sportyear-round,orparticipateinextracurricularcondition- obesity, diabetes, cancer, severe burns, and physical limita-
ing activities at private training centers. In addition, to tions,andintellectualdisabilities.
promote long-term gains in strength and performance in
children and adolescents, training programs should include
educational sessions on lifestyle factors and behaviors that
REFERENCES
are conductive to high performance (129). Of note, the 1. Abernethy,LandBleakley,C.Strategiestopreventinjuryin
adolescentsport:Asystematicreview.BrJSportsMed41:627–638,
importanceofpropernutrition(52),sufficienthydration(44),
2007.
and adequate sleep (165) should not be overlooked. A
2. Adams,K,O’Shea,J,O’Shea,K,andClimstein,M.Theeffectofsix
detailedreviewofperiodizationandlifestylefactorsthatmay weeksofsquat,plyometricandsquat-plyometrictrainingonpower
influence athletic performance are beyond the scope of this production.JStrengthCondRes6:36–41,1992.
review, but they are available elsewhere (129,136,138). 3. AmericanAcademyofPediatrics.Intensivetrainingandspecial-
izationinyoungathletes.Pediatrics106:154–157,2000.
4. AmericanAcademyofPediatrics.Preventionofpediatricover-
CONCLUSIONS weightandobesity.Pediatrics112:424–430,2003.
Despiteoutdated concernsregardingthesafetyoreffective- 5. AmericanAcademyofPediatrics.Strengthtrainingbychildrenand
adolescents.Pediatrics121:835–840,2008.
ness of youth resistance training, scientific evidence and
6. AmericanCollegeofSportsMedicine.ACSM’sGuidelinesfor
clinicalimpressionsindicatethatyouthresistancetraininghas
ExerciseTestingandPrescription(7thed.).Baltimore,MD:
the potential to offer observable health and fitness value to Lippincott,Williams&Wilkins,2007
childrenandadolescents,providedthatappropriatetraining 7. AmericanDieteticAssociation.PositionoftheAmericanDietetic
guidelinesarefollowedandqualifiedinstructionisavailable. Association:Individual-,family-,school-,andcommunity-based
interventionsforpediatricoverweight.JAmDietAssoc106:
In addition to performance-related benefits, the effects of
925–945,2006.
resistance training on selected health-related measures
8. AmericanOrthopaedicSocietyforSportsMedicine.Proceedingsof
including bone health, body composition, and sports injury theConferenceonStrengthTrainingandthePrepubescent.Chicago,IL:
reductionshouldberecognizedbyteachers,coaches,parents, AmericanOrthopaedicSocietyforSportsMedicine,1988.
andhealthcareproviders.Thesehealthbenefitscanbesafely 9. Andersen,L,Wedderkopp,N,andLeboeuf-Yde,C.Association
betweenbackpainandphysicalfitnessinadolescents.Spine31:
obtainedbymostchildrenandadolescentswhenprescribed
1740–1744,2006.
age-appropriateresistancetrainingguidelines.
10. Annesi,J,Faigenbaum,A,Westcott,W,Smith,A,Unruh,J,and
Wenowhavetheinformationtosupporttheconsideration
FranklinG.EffectsoftheYouthFitforLifeprotocolon
of incorporating resistance training into a health-oriented physiological,mood,self-appraisal,andvoluntaryphysicalactivity
approach to lifelong physical activity. Important future changesinAfricanAmericanpreadolescents:Contrastingafter-
schoolcareandphysicaleducationformats.IntJClinHealthPsychol
research goals should be to elucidate the mechanisms
7:641–659,2007.
responsible for the health-related benefits associated with
11. Annesi,J,Westcott,W,Faigenbaum,A,andUnruh,J.Effectsofa12
youth resistance exercise, to establish the combination of weekphysicalactivityprogramdeliveredbyYMCAafter-school
program variables that may optimize long-term training counselors(YouthFitforLife)onfitnessandself-efficacychanges
in5–12yearoldboysandgirls.ResQExercSport76:468–476,2005.
adaptations and exercise adherence in children and adoles-
12. AustralianStrengthandConditioningAssociation.Resistance
cents, and to explore the potential benefits of resistance
trainingforchildrenandyouth:Apositionstandfromthe
trainingonyouthwithvariousmedicalconditionsincluding AustralianStrengthandConditioningAssociation.2007.Available
S73
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 15 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
at:http://www.strengthandconditioning.org.AccessedApril4, 33. BritishAssociationofExerciseandSportSciences.BASESposition
2008. statementonguidelinesforresistanceexerciseinyoungpeople.
JSportsSci22:383–390,2004.
13. Bailey,R,Olsen,J,Pepper,S,Porszasz,J,Barstow,T,andCooper,
D.Thelevelandtempoofchildren’sphysicalactivities:An 34. Brooks,M,Schiff,M,Koepsell,T,andRivara,F.Prevalenceof
observationalstudy.MedSciSportsExerc27:1033–1041,1995. preseasonconditioningamonghighschoolathletesintwospring
sports.MedSciSportsExerc39:241–247,2007.
14. Baker,D.Differencesinstrengthandpoweramongjunior-high,
senior-high,college-aged,andeliteprofessionalrugbyleague 35. Brown,EandKimball,R.Medicalhistoryassociatedwith
players.JStrengthCondRes16:581–585,2002. adolescentpowerlifting.Pediatrics72:636–644,1983.
15. Bass,S.Theprepubertalyears.Auniquelyopportunestageof 36. Brown,M,Mayhew,J,andBoleach,L.Effectofplyometrictraining
growthwhentheskeletonismostresponsivetoexercise?Sports onverticaljumpperformanceinhighschoolbasketballplayers.
Med39:73–78,2000. JSportsMedPhysFitness26:1–4,1986.
16. Bass,S,Pearce,G,Bradney,M,Hendrich,E,Delmas,P,Harding,A, 37. Bulgakova,N,Vorontsov,A,andFomichenko,T.Improvingthe
andSeeman,E.Exercisebeforepubertymayconferresidual technicalpreparednessofyoungswimmersbyusingstrength
benefitsinbonedensityinadulthood:Studiesinactiveprepubertal training.SovSportsRev25:102–104,1990.
andretiredfemalegymnasts.JBoneMineralRes13:500–507,1998.
38. Byrd,R,Pierce,K,Rielly,L,andBrady,J.Youngweightlifters’
17. Baumgartner,TandWood,S.Developmentofshoulder-girdle performanceacrosstime.SportsBiomech2:133–140,2003.
strength-enduranceinelementarychildren.ResQExercSport55:
39. Cahill,BandGriffith,E.Effectofpreseasonconditioningonthe
169–171,1984.
incidenceandseverityofhighschoolfootballkneeinjuries.AmJ
18. Behm,D,Faigenbaum,A,Falk,B,andKlentrou,P.Canadian SportsMed6:180–184,1978.
SocietyforExercisePhysiologypositionpaper:Resistancetraining
40. Caine,D,Caine,C,andMaffulli,N.Incidenceanddistributionof
inchildrenandadolescents.JApplPhysiolNutrMetab33:547–561,
pediatricsport-relatedinjuries.ClinJSportsMed16:500–513,2006.
2008.
41. Caine,D,DiFiori,J,andMaffulli,N.Physealinjuriesinchildren’and
19. Behm,D,Wahl,M,Button,D,Power,K,andAnderson,K.
youthsports:Reasonsforconcern?BrJSportsMed40:749–760,
Relationshipbetweenhockeyskatingspeedandselectedperfor- 2006.
mancemeasures.JStrengthCondRes19:326–331,2005.
42. Calfas,KandTaylor,W.Effectsofphysicalactivityon
20. Bellew,JandGehrig,L.Acomparisonofbonemineraldensityin psychologicalvariablesinadolescents.PediatrExercSci6:406–423,
adolescentfemaleswimmers,soccerplayers,andweightlifters. 1994.
PediatrPhysTher18:19–22,2006.
43. Carbonell,SandBrandi,M.2006updateongeneticdeterminants
21. Benson,A,Torade,M,andFiataroneSingh,M.Muscularstrength ofosteoporosis.JEndocrinolInvest30:2–7,2007.
andcardiorespiratoryfitnessisassociatedwithhigherinsulin
sensitivityinchildrenandadolescents.IntJPediatrObes1:222–231, 44. Casa,DandYeargin,S.Avoidingdehydrationamongyoung
2006. athletes.ACSMHealthFitnessJ9:20–23,2005.
22. Benson,A,Torade,M,andFiataroneSingh,M.Arationaleand 45. CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention.Sports-relatedinjuries
methodforhigh-intensityprogressiveresistancetrainingwith amonghighschoolathletes—UnitedStates,2005–06schoolyear.
childrenandadolescents.ContempClinTrials28:442–450,2007. MMWRMorbMortalWklyRep55:1037–1040,2006.
23. Benson,A,Torade,M,andFiataroneSingh,M.Effectsofresistance 46. Christou,M,Smilios,I,Sptiropoulos,K,Volaklis,K,Pilianidis,T,
trainingonmetabolicfitnessinchildrenandadolescents.ObesRev andTokmakidid,S.Effectsofresistancetrainingonthephysical
9:43–66,2008. capacitiesofadolescentsoccerplayers.JStrengthCondRes20:
783–791,2006.
24. Benson,A,Torade,M,andFiataroneSingh,M.Theeffectofhigh-
intensityprogressiveresistancetrainingonadiposityinchildren: 47. Chu,D,Faigenbaum,A,andFalkel,J.ProgressivePlyometricsforKids.
Arandomizedcontrolledtrial.IntJObes32:1016–1027,2008. Monterey,CA:HealthyLearning,2006.
25. Benton,J.Epiphysealfracturesinsports.PhysSportsmed10:63–71, 48. Clarkson,P.Casereportofexertionalrhabdomyolysisina12year
1983. oldboy.MedSciSportsExerc38:197–200,2006.
26. Blanksby,BandGregor,J.Anthropometric,strength,and 49. Compton,D,Hill,P,andSinclair,J.Weight-lifters’blackout.Lancet
physiologicalchangesinmaleandfemaleswimmerswith 2:1234–1237,1973.
progressiveresistancetraining.AustJSportSci1:3–6,1981. 50. Conroy,B,Kraemer,W,Maresh,C,Fleck,S,Stone,M,Fry,A,
Miller,P,andDalsky,G.Bonemineraldensityinelitejunior
27. Blimkie,C.Age-andsex-associatedvariationinstrengthduring
childhood:Anthropometric,morphologic,neurologic,biome-
Olympicweightlifters.MedSciSportsExerc25:1103–1109,1993.
chanical,endocrinologic,genetic,andphysicalactivitycorrelates. 51. Cossor,J,Blanksby,B,andElliot,B.Theinfluenceofplyometric
In:PerspectivesinExerciseScienceandSportsMedicine,Vol.2:Youth, trainingonthefreestyletumbleturn.JSciMedSport2:106–116,
ExerciseandSport.Gisolfi,CVandLamb,DR,eds.Indianapolis,IN: 1999.
Benchmark,1989.pp.99–163.
52. Cotugna,N,Vickery,C,andMcBee,S.Sportsnutritionforyoung
28. Blimkie,C.Resistancetrainingduringpre-andearlypuberty: athletes.JSchNurs21:323–328,2005.
Efficacy,trainability,mechanismsandpersistence.CanJSportSci
53. Coutts,A,Murphy,A,andDascombe,B.Effectofdirect
17:264–279,1992.
supervisionofastrengthcoachonmeasuresofmuscularstrength
29. Blimkie,C,Martin,J,Ramsay,D,Sale,D,andMacDougall,D.The andpowerinyoungrugbyleagueplayers.JStrengthCondRes18:
effectsofdetrainingandmaintenanceweighttrainingonstrength 316–323,2004.
developmentinprepubertalboys.CanJSportSci14:104P,1989.
54. Dencker,M,Thorsson,O,Karlsson,M,Linden,C,Eiberg,S,
30. Blimkie,C,Rice,S,Webber,C,Martin,J,andGordon,C.Effectsof Wollmer,P,andAndersen,L.Dailyphysicalactivityrelatedto
resistancetrainingonbonemineralcontentanddensityin bodyfatinchildrenaged8–11years.JPediatr149:38–42,2006.
adolescentfemales.CanJPhysiolPharmacol74:1025–1033,1996.
55. DeRenne,C,Hetzler,R,Buxton,B,andHo,K.Effectsoftraining
31. Brady,T,Cahill,B,andBodnar,L.Weighttrainingrelatedinjuries frequencyonstrengthmaintenanceinpubescentbaseballplayers.
inthehighschoolathlete.AmJSportsMed10:1–5,1982. JStrengthCondRes10:8–14,1996.
32. Brenner,J.Overuseinjuries,overtraining,andburnoutinchildand 56. Diallo,O,Dore,E,Duche,P,andVanPraagh,E.Effectsof
adolescentathletes.Pediatrics119:1242–1245,2007. plyometrictrainingfollowedbyareducedtrainingprogramon
S74 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 16 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
physicalperformanceinprepubescentsoccerplayers.JSportsMed 76. Faigenbaum,A,McFarland,J,Schwerdtman,J,Ratamess,N,Kang,
PhysFitness41:342–348,2001. N,andHoffman,J.Dynamicwarm-upprotocols,withandwithout
aweightedvest,andfitnessperformanceinhighschoolfemale
57. Dimitrov,D.Agetobeginwithweightliftingtraining.In:Proceedings
athletes.JAthlTrain41:357–363,2006.
oftheInternationalWeightliftingSymposium.A.Lukacsfalviand
F.Takacs,eds.Budapest,Hungary:InternationalWeightlifting 77. Faigenbaum,AandMediate,P.Theeffectsofmedicineballtraining
Federation,1993.pp.25–30. onphysicalfitnessinhighschoolphysicaleducationstudents.
PhysEduc63:160–167,2006.
58. Dishman,R,Motl,R,Saunders,R,Felton,G,Ward,D,Dowda,M,
andPate,R.Enjoymentmediateseffectsofaschool-basedphysical- 78. Faigenbaum,A,Milliken,L,Cloutier,C,andWestcott,W.
activityintervention.MedSciSportsExerc37:478–487,2005. Perceivedexertionduringresistanceexerciseinchildren.Percept
MotSkills98:627–637,2004.
59. Docherty,D,Wenger,H,Collis,M,andQuinney,H.Theeffectsof
variablespeedresistancetrainingonstrengthdevelopmentin 79. Faigenbaum,A,Milliken,L,LaRosaLoud,R,Burak,B,Doherty,C,
prepubertalboys.JHumMovStud13:377–382,1987. andWestcott,W.Comparisonof1dayand2daysperweekof
strengthtraininginchildren.ResQExercSport73:416–424,2002.
60. Dominguez,R.Shoulderpaininagegroupswimmers.In:
SwimmingMedicineIV.Erikkson,BandFurberg,B,eds.Baltimore, 80. Faigenbaum,A,Milliken,L,Moulton,L,andWestcott,W.Early
MD:UniversityParkPress,1978.pp.105–109. muscularfitnessadaptationsinchildreninresponsetotwodifferent
resistancetrainingregimens.PediatrExercSci17:237–248,2005.
61. Drawer,FandFuller,C.Propensityforosteoarthritisandlower
limbjointpaininretiredprofessionalsoccerplayers.BrJSportsMed 81. Faigenbaum,A,Milliken,L,andWestcott,W.Maximalstrength
35:402–408,2001. testinginchildren.JStrengthCondRes17:162–166,2003.
62. Ebbeling,C,Pawlak,D,andLudwig,D.Childhoodobesity:Public 82. Faigenbaum,A,Ratamess,N,McFarland,J,Kaczmarek,J,
healthcrisis,commonsensecure.Lancet360:473–482,2002. Coraggio,M,Kang,J,andHoffman,J.Effectofrestintervallength
onbenchpressperformanceinboys,teensandmen.Pediatr
63. Emery,C,Cassidy,J,Klassen,T,Rosychuk,R,andRowe,B.
ExercSci20:457–469,2008.
Effectivenessofahome-basedbalancetrainingprogramin
reducingsports-relatedinjuriesamonghealthyadolescents:A 83. Faigenbaum,AandWestcott,W.Resistancetrainingforobese
clusterrandomizedcontrolledtrial.CMAJ172:749–754,2005. childrenandadolescents.President’sCouncilonPhysicalFitnessand
SportResDigest8:1–8,2007.
64. Emery,C,Meeuwisse,W,andMcAllister,J.Surveyofsport
participationandsportinjuryriskinCalgaryandareahighschools. 84. Faigenbaum,AandWestcott,W.YouthStrengthTrainingforHealth,
ClinJSportMed16:20–26,2006. FitnessandSport.Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2009.
65. Emery,C,Rose,M,McAllister,J,andMeeuwisse,W.Aprevention 85. Faigenbaum,A,Westcott,W,Long,C,Loud,R,Delmonico,M,
strategytoreducetheincidenceofinjuryinhighschoolbasketball: andMicheli,L.Relationshipbetweenrepetitionsandselected
Aclusterrandomizedcontrolledtrial.ClinJSportsMed17:17–24. percentagesoftheonerepetitionmaximuminchildren.Pediatr
PhysTher10:110–113,1998.
66. Faigenbaum,A.Strengthtrainingforchildrenandadolescents.
ClinSportsMed19:593–619,2000. 86. Faigenbaum,A,Westcott,W,Loud,R,andLong,C.Theeffectsof
differentresistancetrainingprotocolsonmuscularstrengthand
67. Faigenbaum,A.Resistancetrainingforchildrenandadolescents:
endurancedevelopmentinchildren.Pediatrics104:e5,1999.
Aretherehealthoutcomes?AmJLifestyleMed1:190–200,2007.
87. Faigenbaum,A,Westcott,W,Micheli,L,Outerbridge,A,Long,C,
68. Faigenbaum,A,Bellucci,M,Bernieri,A,Bakker,B,andHoorens,K.
LaRosa-Loud,R,andZaichkowsky,L.Theeffectsofstrength
Acuteeffectsofdifferentwarm-upprotocolsonfitnessperfor-
traininganddetrainingonchildren.JStrengthCondRes10:109–114,
manceinchildren.JStrengthCondRes19:376–381,2005.
1996.
69. Faigenbaum,A,Farrell,A,andRadler,T.‘‘PlyoPlay’’:Anovel
88. Faigenbaum,A,Zaichkowsky,L,Westcott,W,Micheli,L,and
programofshortboutsofmoderateandhighintensityexercise
Fehlandt,A.Theeffectsofatwiceperweekstrengthtraining
improvesphysicalfitnessinelementaryschoolchildren.PhysEduc
programonchildren.PediatrExercSci5:339–346,1993.
66:37–44,2009.
89. Faigenbaum,A,Zaichkowsky,L,Westcott,W,Micheli,L,
70. Faigenbaum,A,Glover,S,O’Connell,J,LaRosaLoud,R,and
Outerbridge,A,Long,C,andLaRosa-Loud,R.Psychological
Westcott,W.Theeffectsofdifferentresistancetrainingprotocols
effectsofstrengthtrainingonchildren.JSportBehav20:164–175,
onupperbodystrengthandendurancedevelopmentinchildren.
1997.
JStrengthCondRes15:459–465,2001.
90. Falk,BandDotan,R.Child-adultdifferencesintherecoveryfrom
71. Faigenbaum,A,Kang,J,McFarland,J,Bloom,J,Magnatta,J,
highintensityexercise.ExercSportSciRev34:107–112,2006.
Ratamess,N,andHoffman,J.Acuteeffectsofdifferentwarm-up
protocolsonanaerobicperformanceinteenageathletes.Pediatr 91. Falk,BandEliakim,A.Resistancetraining,skeletalmuscleand
ExercSci17:64–75,2006. growth.PediatrEndocrinolRev1:120–127,2003.
72. Faigenbaum,A,Kraemer,W,Cahill,B,Chandler,J.Dziados,J, 92. Falk,BandMor,G.Theeffectsofresistanceandmartialarts
Elfrink,L,Forman,E,Gaudiose,M,Micheli,L,Nitka,M,and trainingin6-to8-year-oldboys.PediatrExercSci8:48–56,1996.
Roberts,S.M,andRoberts,S.Youthresistancetraining:Position 93. Falk,B,Sadres,E,Constantini,N,Zigel,L,Lidor,R,andEliakim,A.
statementpaperandliteraturereview.StrengthCondJ18:62–75, Theassociationbetweenadiposityandtheresponsetoresistance
1996. trainingamongpre-andearly-pubertalboys.JPediatrEndocrinol
73. Faigenbaum,AandMcFarland,J.Guidelinesforimplementing Metab15:597–606,2002.
adynamicwarm-upforphysicaleducation.JPhysEducRecDance 94. Falk,BandTenenbaum,G.Theeffectivenessofresistancetraining
78:25–28,2007. inchildren.Ameta-analysis.SportsMed22:176–186,1996.
74. Faigenbaum,A,McFarland,J,Johnson,L,Kang,J,Bloom,J, 95. Fatouros,I,Jamurtas,A,Leontsini,D,Kyriakos,T,Aggelousis,N,
Ratamess,N,andHoffman,J.Preliminaryevaluationofanafter- Kostopoulos,N,andBuckenmeyer,P.Evaluationofplyometric
schoolresistancetrainingprogram.PerceptMotSkills104:407–415, exercisetraining,weighttraining,andtheircombinationonvertical
2007. jumpperformanceandlegstrength.JStrengthCondRes14:470–
476,2000.
75. Faigenbaum,A,McFarland,J,Keiper,F,Tevlin,W,Kang,J,
Ratamess,N,andHoffman,J.Effectsofashorttermplyometricand 96. Flanagan,S,Laubach,L,DeMarco,G,Alvarez,C,Borchers,S,
resistancetrainingprogramonfitnessperformanceinboysage Dressman,E,Gorka,C,Lauer,M,McKelvy,A,Metzler,M,
12to15years.JSportsSciMed6:519–525,2007. Poeppelman,J,Redmond,C,Riggenbach,M,Tichar,S,Wallis,K,
S75
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 17 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
andWeseli,D.Effectsoftwodifferentstrengthtrainingmodeson 118. Hetzler,R,DeRenne,C,Buxton,B,Ho,K,Chai,D,andSeichi,G.
motorperformanceinchildren.ResQExercSport73:340–344,2002. Effectsof12weeksofstrengthtrainingonanaerobicpowerin
prepubescentmaleathletes.JStrengthCondRes11:174–181,
97. Fleck,SandKraemer,W.DesigningResistanceTrainingPrograms
1997.
(3rded.).Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2004.
119. Hewett,T,Myer,G,andFord,K.Reducingkneeandanterior
98. Fripp,RandHodgson,J.Effectofresistivetrainingonplasmalipid
cruciateligamentinjuriesamongfemaleathletes.JKneeSurg18:
andlipoproteinlevelsinmaleadolescents.JPediatr111:926–931,
82–88,2005.
1987.
120. Hewett,T,Riccobene,J,Lindenfeld,T,andNoyes,F.Theeffectsof
99. Fry,AandKraemer,W.Resistanceexerciseovertrainingand
neuromusculartrainingontheincidenceofkneeinjuryinfemale
overreaching.SportsMed23:106–129,1997.
athletes:Aprospectivestudy.AmJSportsMed27:699–706,1999.
100. Fukunga,T,Funato,K,andIkegawa,S.Theeffectsofresistance
121. Hind,KandBorrows,M.Weight-bearingexerciseandbone
trainingonmuscleareaandstrengthinprepubescentage.Ann
mineralaccrualinchildrenandadolescents:Areviewofcontrolled
PhysiolAnthropol11:357–364,1992.
trials.Bone51:81–101,2007.
101. Funato,K,Fukunaga,T,Asami,T,andIkeda,S.Strengthtraining
122. Hoffman,J,Faigenbaum,A,Ratamess,N,Ross,R,Kang,J,and
forprepubescentboysandgirls.In:ProceedingsoftheDepartmentof
Tenenbaum,G.Nutritionalsupplementationandanabolicsteroid
SportsScience.Tokyo,Japan:UniversityofTokyo,1987.pp.9–19.
useinadolescents.MedSciSportsExerc40:15–24,2008.
102. George,D,Stakiw,K,andWrightC.Fatalaccidentwithweight-
123. Holloway,J,Beuter,A,andDuda,J.Self-efficacyandtrainingin
liftingequipment:Implicationsforsafetystandards.CanMedAssoc
adolescentgirls.JApplSocPsychol18:699–719,1988.
J140:925–926,1989.
124. Horvat,M,Franklin,C,andBorn,D.Predictingstrengthinhigh
103. Gillis,L,Kennedy,L,andBar-Or,O.Overweightchildrenreduce
schoolwomenathletes.JStrengthCondRes21:1018–1022,2007.
theiractivitylevelsearlierinlifethanhealthyweightchildren.
ClinJSportsMed16:51–55,2006. 125. Ingle,L,Sleap,M,andTolfrey,K.Theeffectofacomplextraining
anddetrainingprogrammeonselectedstrengthandpower
104. Golan,R,Falk,B,Hoffman,J,Hochberg,Z,Ben-Sira,D,andBarak,
variablesinearlyprepubertalboys.JSportsSci24:987–997,2006.
Y.Resistancetrainingforchildrenandadolescents.Position
StatementbytheInternationalFederationofSportsMedicine 126. InstituteofMedicineoftheNationalAcademies.Preventing
(FIMS).In:SportsandChildren.Chan,KandMicheli,L,eds.Hong ChildhoodObesity.HealthintheBalance.Washington,DC:The
Kong:LippincottWilliams&Wilkins,1998.pp.265–270. NationalAcademiesPress,2005.pp.21–53.
105. Gonzales-Badillo,J,Gorostiaga,E,Arellano,R,andIzquierdo,M. 127. InternationalHealth,RacquetandSportsclubAssociation.2006
Moderateresistancetrainingvolumeproducesmorefavorable ProfilesofSuccess.Boston,MA:InternationalHealth,Racquetand
strengthgainsthanhighorlowvolumesduringashort-term SportsclubAssociation,2006.
trainingcycle.JStrengthCondRes19:689–697,2005. 128. Jenkins,NandMintowt-Czyz,W.Bilateralfractureseparationsof
106. Goran,M,Reynolds,K,andLindquist,C.Roleofphysicalactivity thedistalradialepiphysesduringweight-lifting.BrJSportsMed20:
inthepreventionofobesityinchildren.IntJObes23:S18–S33, 72–73,1986.
1999. 129. Jeffreys,I.CoachesGuidetoEnhancingRecoveryinAthletes:A
107. Gould,JandDeJong,A.Injuriestochildreninvolvinghome MultidimensionalApproachtoDevelopingthePerformanceLifestyle.
exerciseequipment.ArchPediatrAdolescMed148:1107–1109,1994. Monterey,CA:HealthyLearning,2008.
108. Gumbs,V,Segal,D,Halligan,J,andLower,G.Bilateraldistalradius 130. Jeffreys,I.Quadrennialplanningforthehighschoolathlete.
andulnarfracturesinadolescentweightlifters.AmJSportsMed10: StrengthCondJ30:74–83,2008.
375–379,1982. 131. Jeffries,L,Milanese,S,andGrimmer-Somers,K.Epidemiologyof
109. Grimmer,K,Jones,D,andWilliams,J.Prevalenceofadolescence adolescentspinalpain.Spine23:2630–2637,2007.
injuryfromrecreationalexercise:AnAustralianperspective. 132. Jones,C,Christensen,C,andYoung,M.Weighttraininginjury
JAdolescHealth27:266–272,2000. trends.PhysSportsMed28:61–72,2000.
110. Gustavsson,A,Olsson,T,andNordstrom,P.Rapidlossofbone 133. Knudson,D.Currentissuesinflexibilityfitness.President’sCouncilon
mineraldensityofthefemoralneckaftercessationoficehockey PhysicalFitnessandSportsResDigest3:1–6,2000.
training:A6yearlongitudinalstudyinmales.JBoneMinerRes18:
134. Kotzamanidis,C.Effectofplyometrictrainingonrunning
1964–1969,2003.
performanceandverticaljumpinginprepubertalboys.JStrength
111. Guy,JandMicheli,L.Strengthtrainingforchildrenand CondRes20:441–445,2006.
adolescents.JAmAcadOrthoSurg9:29–36,2001.
135. Kraemer,W.Endocrineresponsetoresistanceexercise.MedSci
112. Hagberg,J,Ehsani,A,Goldring,D,Hernandez,A,Sinacore,D,and SportsExerc20(Suppl.):S152–157,1988.
Holloszy,J.Effectofweighttrainingonbloodpressureand
136. Kraemer,W,Adams,K,Cafarelli,E,Dudley,G,Dooly,C,
hemodynamicsinhypertensiveadolescents.JPediatrics104:
Feigenbaum,M,Fleck,S,Franklin,B,Fry,A,Hoffman,J,Newton,
147–151,1984.
R,Potteiger,J,Stone,M,Ratamess,N,andTriplett-McBride,T.
113. Ha¨kkinen,K,Mero,A,andKavhanen,H.Specificityofendurance, Progressionmodelsinresistancetrainingforhealthyadults.MedSci
sprint,andstrengthtrainingonphysicalperformancecapacityin SportsExerc34:364–380,2002.
youngathletes.JSportsMedPhysFitness29:27–35,1989.
137. Kraemer,WandFleck,S.StrengthTrainingforYoungAthletes(2nd
114. Hamill,B.Relativesafetyofweightliftingandweighttraining. ed.).Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2005.
JStrengthCondRes8:53–57,1994.
138. Kraemer,WandFleck,S.OptimizingStrengthTraining:Designing
115. Heidt,R,Swetterman,L,Carlonas,R,Traub,J,andTekulve,F. NonlinearPeriodizedWorkouts.Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,
Avoidanceofsoccerinjurieswithpreseasonconditioning.AmJ 2007.
SportsMed28:659–662,2000.
139. Kraemer,W,Fry,A,Frykman,P,Conroy,B,andHoffman,J.
116. Hejna,W,Rosenberg,A,Buturusis,D,andKrieger,A.The Resistancetrainingandyouth.PediatrExercSci1:336–350,1989.
preventionofsportsinjuriesinhighschoolstudentsthrough
140. Kraemer,W,Fry,A,Ratamess,N,andFrench,D.Strengthtesting:
strengthtraining.NatStrengthCondAssocJ4:28–31,1982.
Developmentandevaluationofmethodology.In:Physiological
117. Hetherington,M.Effectofisometrictrainingontheelbowflexion AssessmentofHumanFitness(2nded.).Maud,P,andFoster,C,eds.
forcetorqueofgradefiveboys.ResQ47:41–47,1976. Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2006.pp.119–150.
S76 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 18 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
141. Kraemer,WandRatamess,N.Fundamentalsofresistancetraining: 161. Micheli,L.Preventinginjuriesinsports:Whattheteamphysician
Progressionandexerciseprescription.MedSciSportsExerc36:674– needstoknow.In:F.I.M.S.TeamPhysicianManual(2nded.).
688,2004. Chan,K,Micheli,L,Smith,A,Rolf,C,Bachl,N,Frontera,W,and
Alenabi,T,eds.HongKong:CDConcept,2006.pp.555–572.
142. Kravitz,L,Akalan,C,Nowicki,K,andKinzey,S.Predictionof
1repetitionmaximuminhighschoolpowerlifters.JStrength 162. Micheli,L,Glassman,R,andKlein,M.Thepreventionofsports
CondRes17:167–172,2003. injuriesinyouth.ClinSportsMed19:821–834,2000.
143. Lephart,S,Abt,J,Ferris,C,Sell,T,Nagai,T,Myers,J,andIrrgang,J. 163. Micheli,LandPurcell,L.TheAdolescentAthlete:APractical
Neuromuscularandbiomechanicalcharacteristicchangesinhigh Approach.NewYork,NY:Springer,2007.
schoolathletes:Aplyometricversusbasicresistanceprogram.BrJ
164. Milliken,L,Faigenbaum,A,LaRosa-Loud,R,andWestcott,W.
SportsMed39:932–938,2005. Correlatesofupperandlowerbodymuscularstrengthinchildren.
144. Lillegard,W,Brown,E,Wilson,D,Henderson,R,andLewis,E. JStrengthCondRes22:1339–1346,2008.
Efficacyofstrengthtraininginprepubescenttoearlypostpubescent 165 Millman,R.Excessivesleepinessinadolescentsandyoungadults:
malesandfemales:Effectsofgenderandmaturity.PediatrRehabil Causes,consequences,andtreatmentstrategies.Pediatrics115:
1:147–157,1997. 1774–1786,2005.
145. MacKelvie,K,Petit,M,Khan,K,Beck,T,andMcKay,H.Bone 166. Morris,F,Naughton,G,Gibbs,J,Carlson,J,andWark,J.
massandstructureandenhancedfollowinga2-yearrandomized Prospectiveten-monthexerciseinterventioninpremenarcheal
controlledtrialofexerciseinprepubertalboys.Bone34:755–764, girls:Positiveeffectsonboneandleanmass.JBoneMinerRes12:
2004. 1453–1462,1997.
146. Malina,R.Trackingofphysicalactivityacrossthelifespan.President’s 167. Mountjoy,M,Armstrong,N,Bizzini,L,Blimkie,C,Evans,J,
CouncilonPhysicalFitnessandSportsResDigest3:1–8,2001. Gerrard,D,Hangen,J,Knoll,K,Micheli,L,Sangenis,P,andVan
147. Malina,R.Weighttraininginyouth-growth,maturationandsafety: Mechelen,W.IOCConsensusStatement:‘‘Trainingtheeliteyoung
Anevidencedbasedreview.ClinJSportsMed16:478–487,2006. athlete.’’ClinJSportMed18:122–123,2008.
148. Malina,R,Bouchard,C,andBar-Or,O.Growth,Maturationand 168. Myer,G,Ford,K,Palumbo,J,andHewitt,T.Neuromuscular
PhysicalActivity(2nded.).Champaign,IL:HumanKinetics,2004. trainingimprovesperformanceandlowerextremitybiomechanics
pp.215–233. infemaleathletes.JStrengthCondRes19:51–60,2005.
149. Mandelbaum,B,Silvers,H,Watanabe,D,Knarr,J,Thomas,S, 169. NationalAssociationforSportandPhysicalEducation.Physical
Griffin,L,Kirkendall,D,andGarrett,W.Effectivenessof EducationforLifelongFitness(2nded.).Champaign,IL:Human
aneuromuscularandproprioceptivetrainingprograminprevent- Kinetics,2005.pp.3–11.
inganteriorcruciateligamentinjuriesinfemaleathletes.AmJSports 170. NationalStrengthandConditioningAssociation.Positionpaperon
Med33:1003–1010,2005. prepubescentstrengthtraining.NatStrengthCondAssocJ7:27–31,
150. Marginson,V,Rowlands,A,Gleeson,N,andEston,R.Comparison 1985.
ofthesymptomsofexercise-inducedmuscledamageafterand 171. Nattiv,A,Loucks,A,Manore,M,Sanborn,C,Sundgot-Borgen,J,
initialandrepeatedboutofplyometricexerciseinmenandboys. andWarren,M.AmericanCollegeofSportsMedicineposition
JApplPhysiol99:1174–1181,2005. stand:Thefemaleathletetriad.MedSciSportsExerc39:1867–1882,
151. Matavulj,D,Kukolj,M,Ugarkovic,J,Tihanyi,J,andJaric,S.Effects 2007.
ofplyometrictrainingonjumpingperformanceinjuniorbasketball 172. Nau,K,Katch,V,Beekman,R,andDick,M.Acuteintraarterial
players.JSportsMedPhysFitness41:159–164,2001. bloodpressureresponsetobenchpressweightliftinginchildren.
152. Mayhew,J,Kerksick,C,Lentz,D,Ware,J,andMayhew,D.Using PediatrExercSci2:37–45,1990.
repetitionstopredictone-repetitionmaximumbenchpressinmale 173. Nichols,D,Sanborn,C,andLove,A.Resistancetrainingand
highschoolathletes.PediatrExercSci16:265–276,2004. bonemineraldensityinadolescentfemales.JPediatr139:473–475,
153. Mayhew,J,McCormick,T,Piper,F,Kurth,A,andArnold,M. 2001.
Relationshipsofbodydimensionstostrengthperformancein 174. Nielsen,B,Nielsen,K,Behrendt-Hansen,M,andAsmussen,E.
noviceadolescentmalepowerlifters.PediatrExercSci5:347–356, Trainingof‘‘functionalmuscularstrength’’ingirls7–19yearsold.
1993. In:ChildrenandExerciseIX.Berg,KandEriksson,Beds.Baltimore,
154. McKay,H,Maclean,L,Petit,M,Mackelvie-O’Brien,K,Janssen,P, MD:UniversityParkPress,1980.pp.69–77.
Beck,T,andKhan,K.‘‘BounceattheBell’’:anovelprogramof 175. Ogden,C,Carrol,L,McDowell,M,Tabak,C,andFlegal,K.
shortboutsofexerciseimprovesproximalfemurbonemassinearly PrevalenceofoverweightandobesityintheUnitedStates,1999–
pubertalchildren.BrJSportsMed39:521–526,2005. 2004.JAmMedAssoc295:1549–1555,2006.
155. McNeal,JandSands,W.Acutestaticstretchingreduceslower 176. Olsen,O,Myklebust,G,EngebretsenL,Holme,I,andBahr,R.
extremitypowerintrainedchildren.PediatrExercSci15:139–145, Exercisestopreventlowerlimbinjuriesinyouthsports:Cluster
2003. randomizedcontrolledtrial.BrMedJ330:449,2005.
156. Mediate,PandFaigenbaum,A.MedicineBallforAllKids. 177. Outerbridge,AandMicheli,L.Overuseinjuriesintheyoung
Monterey,CA:HealthyLearning,2007. athlete.ClinSportsMed14:503–516,1995.
157. Melnick,MandMookerjee,S.Effectsofadvancedweighttraining 178. Ozmun,J,Mikesky,A,andSurburg,P.Neuromuscularadaptations
onbodycathexisandself-esteem.PerceptMotSkills72:1335–1345, followingprepubescentstrengthtraining.MedSciSportsExerc26:
1991. 510–514,1994.
158. Mersch,FandStoboy,H.Strengthtrainingandmuscle 179. Payne,V,Morrow,J,Johnson,L,andDalton,S.Resistancetrainingin
hypertrophyinchildren.In:ChildrenandExerciseXIII.Oseid,Sand childrenandyouth:Ameta-analysis.ResQExercSport68:80–88,1997.
Carlsen,K,eds.Champaign,IL:HumanKineticsBooks,1989.
180. Pfeiffer,RandFrancis,R.Effectsofstrengthtrainingonmuscle
pp.165–182.
developmentinprepubescent,pubescentandpostpubescentmales.
159. Micheli,L.Overuseinjuriesinchildrensports:Thegrowthfactor. PhysSportsmed14:134–143,1986.
OrthopClinNAm14:337–349,1983.
181. Pfeiffer,R,Shea,K,Roberts,D,Grandstrand,S,andBond,L.Lack
160. Micheli,L.Strengthtrainingintheyoungathlete.In:Competitive ofeffectofakneeligamentinjurypreventionprogramonthe
SportsforChildrenandYouth.Brown,EandBranta,Ceds. incidenceofnoncontactanteriorcruciateligamentinjury.JBone
Champaign,IL:HumanKineticsBooks,1988.pp.99–105. JointSurg88A:1769–1774,2006.
S77
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |

--- Page 19 ---
Updated Position Statement Paper From the NSCA
182. Pierce,K,Byrd,R,andStone,M.Youthweightlifting—Isitsafe? 205. Sewall,LandMicheli,L.Strengthtrainingforchildren.JPediatr
WeightliftingUSA17:5,1999. Orthop6:143–146,1986.
183. Pikosky,M,Faigenbaum,A,Westcott,W,andRodriquez,N. 206. Shabi,G,Cruz,M,Ball,G,Weigensberg,M,Salem,G,Crespo,N,
Effectsofresistancetrainingonproteinutilizationinhealthy andGoran,M.Effectsofresistancetrainingoninsulinsensitivityin
children.MedSciSportsExerc34:820–827,2002. overweightLatinoadolescentmales.MedSciSportsExerc38:1208–
1215,2006.
184. Plumert,JandSchwebel,D.Socialandtemperamentalinfluences
onchildren’soverestimationoftheirphysicalabilities:Linksto 207. Shimano,T,Kraemer,W,Spiering,B,Volek,J,Hatfield,D,Silvestre,
accidentalinjuries.JExpChildPsychol67:317–337,1997. R,Vingren,J,Fragala,M,Maresh,C,Fleck,S,Newtown,R,
Spruewenberg,L,andHa¨kkinen,K.Relationshipbetweenthe
185. Prodromos,C,Han,Y,Rogowski,J,Joyce,B,andShi,K.Ameta-
numberofrepetitionsandselectedpercentagesofonerepetition
analysisoftheincidenceofanteriorcruciateligamenttearsas
maximuminfreeweightexercisesintrainedanduntrainedmen.
afunctionofgender,sport,andkneeinjury-reductionregimen.
JStrengthCondRes20:819–923,2006.
Arthroscopy23:1320–1325,2007.
208. Shrier,I.Doesstretchingimproveperformance?Asystematicand
186. Ramsay,J,Blimkie,C,Smith,K,Garner,S,Macdougall,J,and
criticalreviewoftheliterature.ClinJSportsMed14:267–273,2004.
Sale,D.Strengthtrainingeffectsinprepubescentboys.MedSci
SportsExerc22:605–614,1990. 209. Siatras,T,Papadopoulos,G,Mameletzi,D,Gerodimos,V,and
Kellis,S.Staticanddynamicacutestretchingeffectongymnasts’
187. Rians,C,Weltman,A,Cahill,B,Janney,CA,Tippet,S,andKatch,F.
speedinvaulting.PediatrExercSci15:383–391,2003.
Strengthtrainingforprepubescentmales:Isitsafe?AmJSportsMed
15:483–489,1987. 210. Siegal,J,Camaione,D,andManfredi,T.Theeffectsofupperbody
resistancetraininginprepubescentchildren.PediatrExercSci1:
188. Ridgers,N,Fazey,D,andFairclough,S.Perceptionsofathletic
145–154,1989.
competenceandfearofnegativeevaluationduringphysical
education.BrJEducPsychol77:339–349,2007. 211. Sjolie,AandLjunggren,A.Thesignificanceofhighlumbar
mobilityandlowlumbarstrengthforcurrentandfuturelowback
189. Risser,W.Weight-traininginjuriesinchildrenandadolescents.
paininadolescents.Spine26:2629–2636,2001.
AmFamPhys44:2104–2110,1991.
212. Smith,A,Andrish,J,andMicheli,L.Thepreventionofsportsinjuries
190. Risser,W,Risser,J,andPreston,D.Weight-traininginjuriesin
inchildrenandadolescents.MedSciSportsExerc25:S1–S8,1993.
adolescents.AmJDisChild144:1015–1017,1990.
213. Soares,J,Mota,P,Duarte,J,andAppell,H.Childrenareless
191. Robbins,D.Postactivationpotentiationanditspracticalapplica-
susceptibletoexercise-inducedmuscledamagethanadults:
tion:Abriefreview.JStrengthCondRes19:453–458,2005.
Apreliminaryinvestigation.PediatrExercSci8:361–367,1996.
192. Roberts,S,Ciapponi,T,andLytle,R.StrengthTrainingforChildren
214. Sothern,M,Loftin,J,Udall,J,Suskind,R,Ewing,T,Tang,S,and
andAdolescents.Reston,VA:NationalAssociationforSportsand
Blecker,U.Safety,feasibilityandefficacyofaresistancetraining
PhysicalEducation,2008.
programinpreadolescentobeseyouth.AmJMedSci319:370–375,
193. Robertson,R,Goss,F,Aaron,D,Gairola,A,Lowallis,R,Liu,Y, 2000.
Randall,C,Tessmer,K,Schnorr,T,Schroeder,A,andWhite,B.
215. SouthAfricanSportsMedicineAssociation.Resistancetraining
Onerepetitionmaximumpredictionmodelsforchildrenusingthe
inchildrenandadolescents.2001.Availableat:http://www.
OMNIRPEscale.JStrengthCondRes22:196–201,2008.
sasma.org.za.AccessedApril4,2008.
194. Rowe,P.Cartilagefractureduetoweightlifting.BrJSportsMed
216. Steben,R.Thevalidityofthestretchshorteningcycleinselected
13:130–131,1979.
jumpingevents.JSportsMedPhysFitness21:28–37,1981.
195. Rowland,T.Children’sExercisePhysiology(2nded.).Champaign,IL:
217. Steffen,K,Bakka,H,Myklebust,G,andBahr,R.Performanceaspects
HumanKinetics,2005.pp.181–195.
ofaninjurypreventionprogram:Aten-weekinterventioninadoles-
196. Rowland,T.Promotingphysicalactivityforchildren’shealth.Sports centfemalefootballplayers.ScandJMedSciSports18:596–604,2008.
Med37:929–936,2007.
218. Stone,M,Ramsay,M,Kinser,A,O’Bryant,H,Ayers,C,andSands,
197. Ryan,JandSalciccioli,G.Fracturesofthedistalradialepiphysisin W.Stretching:Acuteandchronic?Thepotentialconsequences.
adolescentweightlifters.AmJSportsMed4:26–27,1976. StrengthCondJ28:66–74,2006.
198. Sadres,E,Eliakim,A,Constantini,N,Lidor,R,andFalk,B.The 219. Strong,W,Malina,R,Blimkie,C,Daniels,S,Dishman,R,Gutin,B,
effectoflong-termresistancetrainingonanthropometricmeasures, Hergenroeder,A,Must,A,Nixon,P,Pivarnik,J,Rowland,T,Trost,
musclestrength,andself-conceptinpre-pubertalboys.Pediatr S,andTrudeau,F.Evidencebasedphysicalactivityforschool-age
ExercSci13:357–372,2001. youth.JPediatr146:732–737,2005.
199. Sailors,MandBerg,K.Comparisonofresponsestoweighttraining 220. Sung,R,Yu,C,Chang,S,Mo,S,Woo,K,andLam,C.Effectsof
inpubescentboysandmen.JSportsMed27:30–37,1987. dietaryinterventionandstrengthtrainingonbloodlipidlevelin
200. Sale,D.Strengthtraininginchildren.In:PerspectivesinExercise obesechildren.ArchDisChild86:407–410,2002.
ScienceandSportsMedicine.G.GisolfiandDLamb,eds.Indian- 221. Szymanski,D,Szymanski,J,Bradford,J,Schade,R,andPascoe,D.
apolis,IN:BenchmarkPress,1989.pp.165–216. Effectoftwelveweeksofmedicineballtrainingonhighschool
201. Sale,D.Postactivationpotentiation:Roleinhumanperformance.
baseballplayers.JStrengthCondRes21:894–901,2007.
ExercSportSciRev30:138–143,2002. 222. Telama,R,Yang,X,Viikari,J,Valimaki,I,Wane,O,andRaitakari,O.
Physicalactivityfromchildhoodtoadulthood:A21yeartracking
202. Santos,EandJaneira,M.Effectsofcomplextrainingonexplosive
strengthinadolescentmalebasketballplayers.JStrengthCondRes
study.AmJPrevMed28:267–273,2005.
22:903–909,2008. 223. Thacker,S,Gilchrist,J,Stroup,D,andKimsey,C.Theimpactof
stretchingonsportsinjuryrisk:Asystematicreviewofthe
203. Schwingshandl,J,Sudi,K,Eibi,B,Wallner,S,andBorkenstein,M.
Effectofanindividualizedtrainingprogrammeduringweight
literature.MedSciSportsExerc36:371–378,2004.
reductiononbodycomposition:Arandomizedtrial.ArchDisChild 224. Treuth,M,Hunter,G,Figueroa-Colon,R,andGoran,M.Effectsof
81:426–428,1999. strengthtrainingonintra-abdominaladiposetissueinobese
204. Servedio,F,Bartels,R,Hamlin,R,Teske,D,Shaffer,T,and
prepubertalgirls.MedSciSportsExerc30:1738–1743,1998.
Servedio,A.Theeffectsofweighttraining,usingOlympicstylelifts, 225. Trudeau,F,Laurencelle,L,andShephard,R.Trackingofphysical
onvariousphysiologicalvariablesinpre-pubescentboys.MedSci activityfromchildhoodtoadulthood.MedSciSportsExerc36:
SportsExerc17:288,1985. 1937–1943,2004.
S78 JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM

--- Page 20 ---
JothuernalofStrengthandConditioningResearchTM
| www.nsca-jscr.org
226. Tsolakis,C,Messinis,D,Stergioulas,A,andDessypris,A. andimprovescentraladiposityinobeseadolescents.JAmColl
Hormonalresponsesafterstrengthtraininganddetrainingin Cardiol43:1823–1827,2004.
prepubertalandpubertalboys.JStrengthCondRes14:399–404,
243. Watts,K,Jones,T,Davis,E,andGreen,D.Exercisetrainingin
2000.
obesechildrenandadolescents.SportsMed35:375–392,2005.
227. Tsolakis,C,Vagenas,G,andDessypris,A.Strengthadaptationsand
244. Wedderkopp,N,Kaltoft,B,Lundgaard,M,Rusendahl,M,and
hormonalresponsestoresistancetraininganddetrainingin
Froberg,K.Preventionofinjuriesinyoungfemaleplayersin
preadolescentmales.JStrengthCondRes18:625–629,2004.
Europeanteamhandball:Aprospectiveinterventionstudy.ScandJ
228. Tucker,L.Effectsofaweighttrainingprogramontheself-concepts MedSciSports9:41–47,1999.
ofcollegemales.PerceptMotSkills54:1055–1061,1982.
245. Wedderkopp,N,Kaltoft,B,Holm,R,andFroberg,K.Comparison
229. Tucker,L.Effectofweighttrainingonself-concept:Aprofileof oftwointerventionprogrammesinyoungfemaleplayersin
thoseinfluencedmost.ResQExercSport54:389–397,1983. Europeanhandball:Withandwithoutankledisc.ScandJMedSci
Sports13:371–375,2003.
230. Turner,CandRobling,A.Designingexerciseregimenstoincrease
bonestrength.ExercSportSciRev31:45–50,2003. 246. Weltman,A,Janney,C,Rians,C,Strand,K,Berg,B,Tippit,S,Wise,
J,Cahill,B,andKatch,F.Theeffectsofhydraulicresistance
231. UnitedStatesConsumerProductSafetyCommission.National
strengthtraininginpre-pubertalmales.MedSciSportsMed18:
ElectronicInjurySurveillanceSystem.Washington,DC:Directorate
629–638,1986.
forEpidemiology,NationalInjuryInformationClearinghouse,
1979. 247. Weltman,A,Janney,C,Rians,C,Strand,K,andKatch,F.Effectsof
hydraulic-resistancestrengthtrainingonserumlipidlevelsin
232. UnitedStatesConsumerProductSafetyCommission.National
prepubertalboys.AmJDisChild141:777–780,1987.
ElectronicInjurySurveillanceSystem.Washington,DC:Directorate
forEpidemiology,NationalInjuryInformationClearinghouse, 248. Westcott,W.Femaleresponsetoweightlifting.JPhysEduc77:
1987. 31–33,1979.
233. Vamvakoudis,E,Vrabas,I,Galazoulas,C,Stefanidis,P,Metaxas,T, 249. Westcott,W.Anewlookatyouthfitness.AmFitnessQ11:16–19,
andMandroukas,K.Effectsofbasketballtrainingonmaximal 1992.
oxygenuptake,musclestrength,andjointmobilityinyoung
250. Westcott,W,Tolken,J,andWessner,B.School-basedconditioning
basketballplayers.JStrengthCondRes21:930–936,2007.
programsforphysicallyunfitchildren.StrengthCondJ17:5–9,1995.
234. Vaughn,JandMicheli,L.Strengthtrainingrecommendationsfor
251. Willardson,J.Abriefreview:Factorsaffectingthelengthoftherest
theyoungathlete.PhysMedRehabilClinNAm19:235–245,2008.
intervalbetweenresistanceexercisesets.JStrengthCondRes20:
235. Vicente-Rodriquez,G.Howdoesexerciseaffectbonedevelopment 978–984,2006.
duringgrowth?SportsMed36:561–569,2006.
252. YMCAoftheUSA.YMCAsexpandprogramstorespondto
236. Violan,M,Small,E,Zetaruk,M,andMicheli,L.Theeffectsof nation’sgrowinghealthcrisis.Availableat:http://www.ymca.net.
karatetrainingonflexibility,musclestrengthandbalancein8to13 AccessedMarch21,2008.
yearoldboys.PediatrExercSci9:55–64,1997.
253. Yu,C,Sung,R,Hau,K,Lam,P,Nelson,E,andSo,R.Theeffectof
237. Virvidakis,K,Georgiu,E,Korkotsidis,A,Ntalles,K,andProukakis, dietandstrengthtrainingonobesechildren’sphysicalselfconcept.
C.Bonemineralcontentofjuniorcompetitiveweightlifters.IntJ JSportsMedPhysFitness48:76–82,2008.
SportsMed11:244–246,1990.
254. Yu,C,Sung,R,So,R,Lui,K,Lau,W,Lam,P,andLau,E.Effectsof
238. Volek,J,Gomez,A,Scheett,T,Sharman,M,French,D,Rubin,M, strengthtrainingonbodycompositionandbonemineralcontentin
Ratamess,N,McGuigan,M,andKraemer,W.Increasingfluidmilk childrenwhoareobese.JStrengthCondRes19:667–672,2005.
intakefavorablyaffectsbonemineraldensityresponsesto
255. Zafeiridis,A,Dalamitros,A,Dipla,K,Manou,V,Galanis,N,and
resistancetraininginadolescentboys.JAmDietAssoc103:1353–
Kellis,S.Recoveryduringhigh-intensityintermittentanaerobic
1356,2003.
exerciseinboys,teensandmen.MedSciSportsExerc37:505–512,
239. Vrijens,F.Musclestrengthdevelopmentinthepre-andpost- 2005.
pubescentage.MedSport11:152–158,1978.
256. Zahka,K.Adolescenthypertensionupdate.MdMedJ36:413–414,
240. Wang,YandLobstein,T.Worldwidetrendsinchildhood 1987.
overweightandobesity.IntJPediatrObes1:11–25,2006.
257. Zakas,A,Doganis,G,Galazoulas,C,andVamvakoudis,E.Effectof
241. Ward,K,Roberts,S,Adams,J,andMughal,M.Bonegeometryand acutestaticstretchingdurationonisokineticpeaktorquein
densityintheskeletonofprepubertalgymnastsandschool prepubescentsoccerplayers.PediatrExercSci18:252–261,2006.
children.Bone26:1012–1018,2005.
258. Zaricznyj,B,Shattuck,L,Mast,T,Robertson,R,andD’Elia,G.
242. Watts,K,Beye,P,Siafarikas,A,Davis,E,Jones,T,O’Driscoll,G, Sports-relatedinjuriesinschool-agedchildren.AmJSportsMed8:
andGreen,D.Exercisetrainingnormalizesvasculardysfunction 318–324,1980.
S79
VOLUME23 | SUPPLEMENT5| AUGUST2009 |
